Poverty and inequality 

A question of justice?

Mar 11th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


The toll of global poverty is a scandal. But deploring economi c is no
answer
Corbis 
 
 

 
HUNDREDS of millions of people in the world are forced to endure lives
of abject povertyeople in the West than to urge each other, and their
governments, to bring relief to the world's poorest. And what a
tragedy it is, therefore, that many of the kind souls who respond most
eagerly to this imperative bring to the issue an analytical mindset
that is almost wholly counterproductive. They are quite right, these
champions of the world's poor, that poverty in an age of plenty is
shameful and disgusting. But they are quite wrong to suppose, as so
many of them do, that the rich enjoy their privileges at the expense
of the poorhigher than the likely reality: see article) It is not bad
enough, apparently, that enormous numbers of people have to subsist on
less than a dollar a day. The claim that this makes in its own right
on the compassion of the West for its fellow men is deemed,
apparently, too puny. The real scandal, it seems, is that much of the
world is vastly richer than that. The implication, and often enough
the explicit claim, is that the one follows from the other: if only we
in the West weren't so rich, so greedy for resources, so driven by
material ambitiones must express itself as policies that advance one
group's interests at the expense of another's. This puts political and
ethical limits on how far the drive for economic equality ought to
go. (Strictly practical limits, as well, since too noble a
determination to take from the rich to give to the poor will end up
impoverishing everyone.) It also means that perfect economic equality
should never be embraced, even implicitly, as an ideal. Perfect
economic equality is a nightmare: nothing short of a totalitarian
tyranny could ever hope to achieve it.

The preoccupation bordering on obsession with economic equality that
one so often encounters at gatherings of anti-globalists, in the
corridors of aid agencies and in socialist redoubts in backward parts
of the world reflects  a fallacy. This remarkably tenacious
misconception is that there is only so much global income to go
around. If the United States is consuming $10 trillion worth of goods
and services each year, that is $10 trillion worth of goods and
services that Africa cannot consume.

But goods and services are not just lying around waiting to be grabbed
by the greediest or most muscular countries. Market economics is not a
zero-sum game. America consumes $10 trillion worth of goods and
services each year because it produces (not counting the
current-account deficit of 5% or so of the total) $10 trillion of
goods and services each year. Africa could produce and consume a lot
more without America producing and consuming one jot less. It so
happens that the case for more aid, provided of course that it is well
spent, is strongogy, governments relied on planning, state monopolies,
punitive taxes, grandiose programmes of public spending, and all the
other apparatus of applied economic justice. They also repudiated
liberal international trade, because the terms of global commerce were
deemed exploitative and unfair. Concessions (that is, permission to
retain trade barriers) were sought and granted in successive
negotiating rounds of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. A
kind of equity was thus deemed to have been achieved. The only
drawback was that the countries stayed poor.

Towards the end of the century, many developing countriesat goes up
from Africa's supposed friends in the West, telling the region that
its plight is all the fault of global inequality , and an
intrinsically unjust market system.



Heed the call
People and their governments in the West should heed the call of
compassion, and respond with policies to help the world's poor, and
indeed to advance the opportunities of the (much less desperately)
poor in their own countries. Expressed that way, the egalitarian
impulse is a good thing, worth nurturing. But a compassionate regard
for the poor, as any good Marxist will tell you, is a very different
thing from a zeal for economi c. That zeal, despite the exemplary fate
of the socialist experiment at the end of the 20th century, guides a
great deal of thinking still. And it continues to do nothing but harm.

