Consumer Electronics

Digital cameras zoom in

Mar 11th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Consumer electronics: Freed by digital technology from the constraints
of film, the camera business is being transformed
 
 
 

 
THERE comes a point when consumer products using a radically different
technology no longer have to prove themselves. That point has now been
reached with digital cameras, sales of which are soaring: in America,
they now outsell conventional film-based cameras. Globally, the
cross-over will happen next year (see chart). Falling prices and
better performance mean consumer digital cameras are more than a match
for their film counterparts. Further up the scale, professional
photographers are switching to digital in droves, since it lets them
do away with the cost and delay of film processing.

As digital photography goes mainstream, the camera business is being
transformed. One reason is that digital cameras have as much in common
with consumer-electronics devices as they do with film-based camerast
surely shaking off their dependence on personal computers for storage,
management and printing of images. In the early days of digital
photography, it was obligatory to own a PC, just as early
photographers needed their own darkrooms. But high-street shops now
offer to transfer images from the camera's memory card to a CD from
which future prints can be ordered, and many cameras can now plug into
printers directly. As such technical matters are resolved, and
camera-makers jostle to get ahead of one another, the focus will
switch towards targeting different customers with digital cameras that
meet their particular needs.



Pixel power
The pace of change is particularly evident in two parts of the
industry. The first is camera-equipped mobile handsets, around 65m of
which will be sold this year worldwide, according to IDC, a
market-research firm. Sales are expected to reach 125m units in
2005. This means camera-phones are already outselling film and digital
cameras, and will soon outsell both put together. 

So far, the sudden emergence of camera-phones, which generally take
grainy, low-quality images intended for viewing on such handsets' tiny
screens, has had little impact o n photography. Despite mobile
operators' hopes that photo-messaging as handset-makers such as Nokia
muscle in.

The second area to watch is the market for special cameras that cater
to the needs of photography enthusiasts. Traditionally,
film-camera-makers sold compac t cameras to the mass market, and
fancie r (SLR) cameras, with interchangeable lenses, to both
enthusiasts and professionals. This division persisted into the
digital world. But digital SLRs were, until recently, so expensive
that only professionals could afford them. So enthusiasts who wanted
to go digital bought high-end digital point-and-shoot cameras (known
as professional/consumer, o r models) instead; many stuck with their
film-based SLRs.

In the past few months, however, the distinction between high-end
point-and-shoot cameras and digital SLRs has vanished, as the prosumer
cameras have become ever more powerful. The Sony DSC-F828, for
example, has an eight megapixel sensor and a seven-times optical zoom,
and costs $1,200. This kind of camera, notes Chris Chute, an analyst
at IDC ,, namely high-end features and superior picture quality,
without the need to fork out for an expensive camera body and a bag
full of bulky lenses. Meanwhile, the price of digital SLRs has
tumbled: last year Canon was the first company to produce one, the
Digital Rebel, for under $1,000. Its launch, notes Mr Chute, signalled
the beginning of the end for film-based SLRs.

The old rules that used to govern the camera business, in short, have
been swept aside, and the distinctions between previously separate
product categories are rapidly disappearing. With the industry in
flux, this is a difficult time to be a camera-maker. But it is a great
time to be one of their customers. 


