Global economic inequality 

More or less equal?

Mar 11th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Panos 
 
 

 

Is economic inequality around the world getting better or worse?

CRITICS of capitalism are convinced that the gap between rich and poor
is widening across the world. For them, the claim amounts almost to an
article of faith: worsening inequality is a sure sign of the moral
bankruptcy o f. Whether rising inequality should in fact be seen as
condemning capitalism in this way is a question worth addressing in
its own right. There are reasons to doubt it. But it would also be
interesting to know the answer to the narrow factual question. Is the
familiar claim that capitalism makes global inequality worse actually
true?

Unfortunately, this apparently straightforward question turns out to
be harder to answer than one might suppose. There are three broad
areas of difficulty. The first is measuring what people, especially
the poorest people in developing countries, consume. The second is
valuing consumption in a way that allows useful comparisons to be made
across countries and over time. And the third, in effect, is settling
on an appropriate basis of comparison. Which matters more, for
instance: whether inequality is widening among nations, or whether
inequality is widening among all the people of the world, regardless
of which country they happen to live in? Judging any claim about
global inequality is impossible without a clear understanding of how
the researchers concerned have dealt with all three questions.


The third deserves to be emphasised at the outset. A
thought-experiment reveals how easy it is to get muddled. Suppose it
is true that inequality measured across countries is widening. (In
other words, the gap between average incomes in the richest countries
and average incomes in the poorest countries, measured without regard
to changes in population, is growing.) Also suppose that inequality is
worsening within every individual country. Given that cross-country
inequality is widening, and that within-country inequality is getting
worse as well, it would have to follow that global inequality,
measured across all the world's individuals, is rising too, would it
not? Actually, no. Even if those first two assumptions were true,
global inequality measured across all the world's individuals might
well be falling.

How so? Simply add a third assumption: namely, that a group of poor
countries accounting for a big share of all the poor people in the
world was growing very rapidly. Suppose, for instance, that average
incomes in India and China were growing much faster than average
incomes in the rich industrial economies. Then it could be true that
inequality was widening within every country, including within China
and India themselves; and also that the gap between the very poorest
countries (of sub-Saharan Africa) and the richest (Europe and the
United States) was widening; and yet, at the same time, that
inequality measured across all the individuals in the world was
falling fast, because average incomes in the two most populous poor
countries were rapidly going up.

It so happens that average incomes in India and China are going up
extremely rapidly. Without knowing anything else, one should therefore
be sceptical about all the claims that are so confidently made about
risin g.



Poor visibility
Attentive readers of The Economist will remember seeing before the
panel of charts shown below. (They first appeared in a presentation
given at the beginning of 2003 by Stanley Fischer, former deputy chief
of the International Monetary Fund, to the American Economic
Association. We wrote about them in this article of August 23rd last
year.) We make no apologies for showing them to readers again: at a
stroke, they cut through much of the statistical fog surrounding this
subject.

In both charts, the horizontal axis shows the average level of GDP per
head in 1980, and the vertical axis shows the rate of growth in
inflation-adjusted GDP per head between 1980 and 2000. For the moment,
concentrate on chart 1, which shows each country as a single point.

 
 
 

 


If it were true, on average, that incomes in poor countries grew
faster between 1980 and 2000 than incomes in rich countries, then the
points in chart 1 would tend to lie on a downward-sloping line. In
that case, one would say that the poor countries were on average
catching up up. A line of best fit drawn through the points actually
slopes upwards, implying that the poor are falling behind, and that
cross-country inequality is getting worse.

But now look at chart 2. This plots the same countries as circles with
areas drawn in proportion to population. India and China stand out,
both by virtue of their vast populations and also because their growth
record in the 1980s and 1990s was so much better than the poor-country
average. A population-weighted line of best fit drawn through this
second chart would indeed slope downwards, implying both catch-up and
narrowing inequality.

In short, once you take account of the fact that China and India have
performed so well since 1980, and especially since 1990, together with
the fact that these two countries account for such a big share of all
the world's poor, it is difficult to stay as pessimistic about global
trends in poverty and inequality as the critics of global capitalism
wish to be. In effect, these critics must blind themselves to the
extra information in the second chart.

Unfortunately, however, Mr Fischer's admirable diagrams say nothing
about poverty as such: they contain no information about how many of
China's people, or America's or any other country's, are poor. And
they say nothing about whether growth in any particular country is
good for poor people living there (of course, growth raises incomes on
average by definition). To look more carefully at these questions one
must peer through a cloud of statistical and econometric chaff.



Measuring matters
Much of the frequently acrimonious debate among economists about
global poverty and inequality turns out to revolve around a single
technical issue: is it better to measure consumption (and hence living
standards) using data drawn from national accounts or data drawn from
household surveys? The two sources ought to marry up. In fact they
differ systematically, and by a wide margin. Worse, growth in
consumption, not merely levels of consumption, differs persistently
according to which source is used. National-accounts data tend nearly
always to give a much more optimistic view of trends in poverty than
do household-survey data.

Accordingly, in a recent review of the literature* by Angus Deaton of
Princeton University (Mr Deaton is perhaps the only economist at work
in this area who is acknowledged by all sides both as authoritative
and as having no ideological axe to grind) two sets of studies are
contrasted. The first draws mainly on national-accounts data, the
second on household surveys. Their results are at odds.

Work by Surjit Bhalla, by Xavier Sala-i-Martin, and by Francis
Bourguignon and Christian Morrisson shows rapidrds, the number of
people in poverty has been falling not only as a share of the world's
population but also, remarkably, in absolute terms.

Mr Sala-i-Martin's calculations, for instance, show that the
proportion of the world's people living in acute poverty (on less than
a dollar a day) fell from 17% in 1970 to 7% in 1998; the proportion
living on less than $2 a day fell from 41% to 19%. The absolute
headcount of global $1-a-day poverty fell, according to the same
estimates, by 200m (see chart 3); and the count of $2-a-day poverty
fell by 350m. Mr Bhalla, who finds the sharpest drop in poverty of
these authors, wryly states that in 2000 when the United Nations (UN)
announced its Millennium Development Goal on povertysing direct
surveys of households, carry the official imprimatur of the UN, which
uses them in monitoring progress towards its Millennium Development
Goal on poverty. And they seem to show relatively little reduction in
poverty over recent decades.

A paper by Shaohua Chen and Martin Ravallion of the Bank lays out the
thinking behind the Bank's estimates. The authors put the proportion
of people living on less than a dollar a day at 28% in 1987erty line
from one level to another, is apt to have a large effect on the
figures. This underlines the importance of not regarding any of these
numbers as holy writ.

Still, the question remains, why are the differences so big? Several
factors are at work. The World Bank attempts to measur e, as opposed
t o. To the extent that poor people manage to save, their consumption
will be less than their income, and so there will be more poor people
on the Bank's definition. Also, the Bank expresses its poverty ratios
as proportions of population in the developing countries; Mr
Sala-i-Martin, for instance, uses global population; the effect is to
make Mr Sala-i-Martin's estimates, other things equal, smaller than
the Bank's. Country samples also vary from study to study. And on top
of all this comes the effect of basing estimates on national accounts
rather than on household surveys.

It is revealing to consider why, according to the Chen-Ravallion
study, poverty fell relatively slowly on their household-survey
measure. It was not because of an increase in within-country
inequalityas been less growth in the world in the 1990s than we are
used to thinkin.g

It would be a mistake to presume that either source of data is better
in principle. Surveys are famously prone to error because of bad or
fluctuating design, discrepancies in samples and poor execution. But
national accounts have drawbacks as well, especially in poor
countries. For instance, they fail to capture some sorts of non-market
income and consumption. This makes them prone to understate the
consumption of the poor, but also to overstate the growth of
consumption of the poor as incomes rise and as more activities fall
within the scope of market transactions.



Take your pick
Still, most of the discrepancy between the survey estimates and the
national-accounts estimatens t o is usually found to fall. Consistent
with this, the ratio of the two measures is highest in the poorest
countries. 

Mr Deaton argues that both sources ought to be used, though combining
them properly raises a host of difficult technical issues. Meanwhile,
the truth about global poverty and inequality presumably lies
somewhere between the extremes suggested by the two methodologies.

One can at least conclude that the official World Bank data, used by
the UN and other agencies, are too pessimistic: poverty has most
likely fallen faster than these widely cited figures suggest, and
possibly fast enough to reduce the global headcount of those living on
less than a dollar a day, even as population rises. More accurate
answers will require more work to be done. In the meantime, however,
the official position on global poverty ought to start, at a minimum,
to acknowledge the uncertainty surrounding the figures and, further,
to concede that the truth is likely to be better than the official
figures say.



Beside the point?
But what of the fear that global capitalism is making progress at the
expense of the poor? The true figures would probably be quite
reassuring on thisd, to a large extent, the policies of their own and
other governments. Sub-Saharan Africa plainly suffers not from
globalisation, but from lack of it. The focus of attention should be
on how to extend the benefits of international economic linkages to
the region. Removing every rich-country barrier to trade with these
countries would be an excellent place to start.

By contrast, India and China are showing how great the benefits of
international economic integration can be. Neither country is an
exemplar of free-market capitalismsists. Would any such worsening of
inequality entitle one to conclude that India and China had taken a
wrong turn these past 20 years? Of course not. Look at Africa to
understand that there are worse things than inequality.


