Microsoft 

Different strokes

Mar 25th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Is the EU ruling against Microsoft merely a case of history repeating
itself? Actually, no
AP 
 
 

 
STOP us if you've heard this one before. Microsoft, the world's
largest software company, has been found guilty of abusing its
monopoly. Its crime was to stifle competition by including( ) another
of its programs with every copy of its Windows operating system, which
is installed on over 90% of PCsbiquity of Microsoft's program, and
squeezing out its main rival. Regulators have proposed remedies to
punish Microsoft; the company plans to appeal; the case will probably
drag on for several more years.

All of this was true four years ago, and all of it is true again
today. Last time around, Microsoft fell foul of American trustbusters
when it used its monopoly to crush Netscape, a maker of web-browsing
software. This time the ruling has come from Europe's competition
authorities, after Microsoft used the same trick against RealNetworks,
a maker of media-playback software. In the American case, the judge
ordered Microsoft to be broken up. This punishment was overturned on
appeal in 2001, in effect allowing Microsoft to continue to do
business as usual. In Europe, the European Commission has imposed
ashows that it is deeply worried that it might work.

That highlights the key difference between the American and European
cases. The eventual settlement in America was deliberately
backward-looking, though it came too late to save Netscape. In the
case of media-playback software, things are not quite so far advanced:
RealNetworks has been overtaken by Microsoft, but is still alive and
kicking. Mr Monti, however, is less interested in righting past wrongs
than in preventing future ones. During settlement talks, he tried to
get Microsoft to agree to a set of rules about which bits of Windows
can be unbundled in future. It was failure to agree on this point that
derailed the talks last week, and led to this week's ruling.



The next best thing
Microsoft's position is that software is such a complicated and
fast-moving business that no set of rules on unbundling could possibly
work. Instead, say company officials, each case should be treated
individually. This, of course, conveniently allows Microsoft to
continue to do as it pleases: it takes years for each case to work its
way through the courts, and by then Microsoft's bundling has achieved
the desired effect. The European Commission has realised this, and has
tried to fashion a remedy that deals with the causes, rather than just
the symptoms, of Microsoft's monopolistic practices. 

A break-up of the entire firm would have been cleaner. Mr Monti's
unbundling remedy will be difficult to apply, it may not survive an
appeal, and it may not slow the Microsoft juggernaut even if it
does. And yet, if competition is to be preserved and encouraged in the
software industry, it is definitely worth a try. 


