China 

In the dark

Mar 25th 2004 | BEIJING 
From The Economist print edition


Where will the gigawatts come from?
 
 
 

 
BACK in 2000, when they were expecting a five-year run of single-digit
annual increases in national power-demand, Chinese policymakers were
fretting about the likelihood of a power glut, and wondering how they
might absorb the output from new generating stations as they came
online. Instead, demand increases ranged between 10% and 15%, and they
are likely to continue at that rate. As a result, planners are now
wondering instead how they will keep the lights on.

In fact, they do not always manage it. In 21 provinces across China
since last year, power shortages caused homes to fall dark and
factories to fall silent. According to state media, some cities even
lacked the power they needed to run their traffic lights. Among the
hardest hit provinces has been Hunan in southern China, where drought
conditions cut into Hunan's own hydropower production, and tight
supply across the rest of the country made it hard to buy either coal
or electricity from other provinces. Since last November, the
provincial capital, Changsha, has been forced to institute rolling
blackouts, leaving some residents without power in their homes for one
day out of every three. 

Officials in Hunan and elsewhere expect things to ease soon as water
levels recover, but experts give warning that supplies will tighten
again in just a few short months. When summer's heat hits, and China's
ever-expanding middle class reaches to switch on the air conditioning,
China's power grid will once again creak under the strain. 

China has been adding new capacity at a frantic rate in the past two
years and continues to do so. The central government approved more
than 40 power stations last year, and brought most of them online,
adding 30 gigawatts in new capacity. Another 37 gigawatts worth of new
power is due to be added this year. But the increase alone in China's
power demand over the past two years has approximated the total
electricity consumption of Brazil. With an economic growth rate likely
to hover around 7%, and standards of living set to keep rising, at
least for China's hundreds of millions of urban dwellers, demand is
likely to outpace supply for a while yet.

According to Liu Shijin, Director of Industrial Research at China's
State Council Development Research Centre, conservation will be one
key to resolving the imbalance. He says China's energy efficiency lags
far behind nations like Japan, and estimates that, with effective
measures, China could, by 2020, meet one fourth of its new power needs
with saved energy.

For the rest, China knows it will increasingly need to rely on
imported energy. China imports about one third of its crude oil now,
and expects to be importing half by 2010. Its diplomats are showing a
sudden interest in the complexities of the far-off Middle East. Its
geopolitical strategists and naval planners, meanwhile, are thinking
hard about the need to secure shipping lanes and supply routes.



 
