Hungary 

Spinning

Apr 1st 2004 | BUDAPEST 
From The Economist print edition


The strange world of Hungarian politics

THE Socialist-led Hungarian government badly needs a spin-doctor. Its
support is wilting as voters turn right. Polls give the opposition
Fidesz over 50% support, with the Socialists on 32%. Kremlinesque
endorsements by the party for the prime minister, Peter Medgyessy (not
himself a party member), fuel rumours of plots against him. And
aftershocks of the forint crisis in January still reverberate.

It is an odd moment for the Socialists to part ways with their Israeli
public-relations supremo, Ron Werber, credited by Laszlo Kovacs, then
party chairman, with winning the 2002 election. Mr Werber, a former
communications chief at Israel's Labour Party, signed up for Hungary's
Socialists after steering Romania's Socialists to victory in 2000. But
he resigned when he found that Mr Medgyessy's office was courting two
Washington-based lobbying firms. These firms will provide opinion
research and advice until May 31st, for 14.5m forints ($70,000)
apiece.



Hungary



Fidesz, Socialists, Free Democrats, Democratic Forum (last three sites
in Hungarian)




 
Lobbyists and consultants are a new development in central Europe's
youthful democracies. The brave but unphotogenic dissidents who led
the revolutions in 1989 have been shunted aside by pushy,
smooth-talking pollsters and consultants. Their arrival is scant
reward for Mr Werber, who dragged the Socialists' local branches, many
mere ossified remnants of the former communist party, into the 21st
century, teaching officials to speak in short, clear sentences.

Mr Medgyessy's officials deny that Mr Werber's departure and the
American lobbyists' arrival are linked. They point out that Mr Werber
was contracted to the party, but the Americans work directly for the
prime minister. Anyway, Mr Werber may be lured back to run the
Socialists' European campaign in June.

Relations between Mr Medgyessy and the party have, however,
deteriorated. His bizarre suggestion that all four parliamentary
parties (the Socialists and Free Democrats in government, Fidesz and
the Democratic Forum in opposition) should field a joint list in the
June elections, carving up Hungary's 24 seats between them, did not
help. Fidesz dismissed it as a cover for the Socialists' poor showing.

Perhaps the Socialists should recruit Anettka Feher, a television
presenter, for excitement. She appeared naked on screen to launch her
European campaign, but is unlikely to win a seat for her Union Party.


