Cuba 

Cuba's gulag

Apr 1st 2004 | HAVANA 
From The Economist print edition


Fidel Castro's permanent revolution marches on

Get article background

A YEAR ago, Fidel Castro faced a decision. Cuba's fledgling democratic
movement was becoming more vocal. After a partial recovery from a long
slump, the economy had slowed again. In response, Mr Castros still
going backwards.

Last spring, while the world was busy with Iraq, kangaroo Cuban courts
sentenced 75 dissidents to an average of 19 years in prison in secret,
one-day trials. Encouraged by the United States and others, they had
(among othe r) organised a petition calling for more freedoms, and
were found guilty o f. Concerns about their allegedly heinous prison
conditions were not dispelled by this week's staged media visit to two
Havana jails. Also last April, three men were precipitously executed
after trying to hijack a ferry bound for Florida. 

These charades of justice undermined the idea that Mr Castro could be
reformed through constructive engagement. Since then, his control over
Cuba has wound ever tighter. An attritional stream of propaganda pours
forth from his official media, and he is busily moving the country
back to a centrally planned economy, depriving state agencies and
companies of most of the autonomy they had gained in the
market-oriented reforms of the 1990s. Dozens of foreign businesses and
joint ventures are closing under pressure from regulators. Cubans'
access to the internet, and thus to the outside world, is being
curbed. 

Fourteen wives and mothers of the prisoners braved the secret police
to march for clemency and commemorate their incarceration. But most of
the families, and of those dissidents still at liberty