Cyprus 

Unity?

Apr 1st 2004 | B\RGENSTOCK, SWITZERLAND 
From The Economist print edition


The Cyprus unification plan may be rejected by Greek-Cypriots

Get article background

THE idea of shutting up Greek, Turkish and Cypriot leaders in a Swiss
ski resort to get them to agree to reunify Cyprus smacked of
desperation. Kofi Annan, the UN secretary-general, had failed to pull
off a deal last year. This week, he failed againPapadopoulos, the
Greek-Cypriot leader, rejected Mr Annan's latest plan.

The plan will still be put to separate referendums on April 24th in
both halves of the island. But without Mr Papadopoulos's support,
Greek-Cypriot voters are likely to reject it, dashing hopes that a
reunited Cyprus can join the European Union on May 1st. At least it
makes a change from the years when Rauf Denktash, leader of the
Turkish-Cypriots, blocked all deals. Mr Denktash, now 80, had run his
fief since 1974, when Turkish troops invaded the north after a
short-lived coup had tried to fuse Cyprus with Greece.

When the reunification talks resumed in Nicosia in February, Mr
Denktash was as unhelpful as ever. But he decided against coming to
the Swiss talks. Mehmet Ali Talat, the new Turkish-Cypriot prime
minister, and his coalition partner, Serdar Denktash, who is more
pro-European than his father Rauf, were anxious to make a deal. So was
Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey's prime minister, who is eager to polish
his country's credentials in the hope of starting EU accession talks
next year.

Mr Erdogan had persuaded the Turkish generals, formerly loyal to Mr
Denktash, to back a settlement. Costas Karamanlis, Greece's new prime
minister, was also keen to resolve the issue. So the chances for Mr
Annan's plan to reunify the island as a confederation of two republics
looked good. Under the plan, some 8% of the land would be given back
to the Greek-Cypriots, reducing the Turkish-Cypriot share from 37% to
29% (see map). The Greeks would regain the port of Famagusta. The two
states would largely run their own affairs, but th e would handle
relations with the EU. 

 
 
 

 
But with Rauf Denktash off the stage, Mr Papadopoulos emerged as the
hard-liner. The deal fell apart over his demand for more landnsition
period, written into EU law, to stop wealthy Greek-Cypriots buying up
land for development in the north. On this point, he was backed by Mr
Karamanlis, who otherwise kept his distance from the Greek-Cypriot
leader, not least to protect his budding friendship with Mr Erdogan.

What next? A majority of Turkish-Cypriot voters will vote for the plan
on April 24th, even though Rauf Denktash will campaign against it. But
the Greek-Cypriots are likely to say no. That will mean that only the
Greek-Cypriot republic joins the EU on May 1st. Mr Papadopoulos will
be pilloried in Brussels; but he may feel that popularity at home
matters more.


