The presidency 

Better ways to attack George Bush

Apr 1st 2004 
From The Economist print edition


There are plenty of them, alas
 
 
 

 
Get article background

ANOTHER week, another worst one for George Bush since, well, the
previous week. The recriminations surrounding Iraq will not die
down. Richard Clarke, his former anti-terrorism co-ordinator, has
revived the issues of whether Mr Bush's team was negligent in dealing
with al-Qaeda before September 11th and whether the invasion of Iraq
distracted attention from the real pursuit of terrorists. Yet, though
Mr Clarke's book ,, and his public testimony offered gripping glimpses
into the inner workings of the White House, he has not really posed
new questions nor offered new answers. Most people agree that the
answer to the first issue is maybe, but understandably so; and, as to
the second, that it depends on your view about the long-term
anti-terrorist benefits of reshaping the Middle East and punishing
serial cheats. Nothing new has come out to alter that debate: some
hate the invasion of Iraq, some think it was right. The twain will not
soon meet, if ever.

The stranger thing is that, if opinion polls are to be believed, Mr
Bush is not faring too badly despite Mr Clarke's barrage: he seems to
have edged back in front of his Democratic opponent, John Kerry (see
article). No doubt he would have preferred the barrage not to have
happened and his national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, not to
have had to give public testimony before the special commission
investigating September 11th. But he is holding his own, he has raised
$170m and the conservative half of America will surely not let  a like
Mr Kerry win without a fight.

Eventually the choice will come down, as always, to one between two
flawed candidates. Mr Kerry's flaws will emerge later. But the Toxic
Texan's flaws are already plain for all to see and range much more
widely than those raised by Mr Clarke.



Our disagreements with George Bush
As regular readers will know, The Economist endorsed Mr Bush in the
2000 election once he had beaten our preferred candidate, John
McCain. That still looks the right choice for that election. Indeed,
Al Gore served a handy reminder of his unsuitability and poor judgment
by endorsing Howard Dean. This newspaper also supported Mr Bush's most
controversial action, the Iraq ware economic downturntectionism, cost
$180 billion over ten years, and billions more have been given to drug
and energy firms. Mr Bush's words may favour free markets but his
actions have too often favoured big lobbyists. And even his words,
lately, seem to have got stuck in his throat. Ever since the Democrats
began flirting with protectionism, spreading myths about the number of
jobs being outsourced abroad (see article), Mr Bush has been slow to
defend free trade, flip-flopping between concern about outsourcing and
an admirable defence of it. Meanwhile, scant effort has been made to
reform the huge entitlement programmes that are due to go bust once
the baby-boomers start to retire at the end of this decade. 



The war president
Mr Bush's response to his other great challengerms of punishing
terrorists but of spreading reform and democracy, particularly in the
Middle East; and he has made a priority of weapons of mass destruction
and proliferation, the importance of which has been underlined by
events in Pakistan. In two-and-a-half years, he has driven al-Qaeda
into hiding, toppled two barbaric regimes and induced several other
roguish states (including Iran and Libya) to rethink their ways. Even
his worst enemy would not depict him as a weak leader.

Yet mistakes have been made. The most obvious concern is
Iraq. Contrary to Mr Bush's assertions, the war was one of choice, not
necessity. Given that, it was foolish to exaggerate Saddam's weaponry,
downright misleading to imply a link between the Iraqi leader and
al-Qaeda, and hubristic to do so little to prepare for post-war
reconstruction. (When Mr Clarke complains about people in the White
House being obsessed about Iraq, one is tempted to reply :.) Mistakes
soon piled up: handing the running of the country to the Pentagon;
letting looters rip out the infrastructure; disbanding the Iraqi army;
and dismissing outside efforts to help. 

Recently, however, Mr Bush has done better. The plan for a transferral
of some power this summer to a provisional Iraqi government looks a
realistic gamble. Rightly, he has promised not to cut and run from
America's responsibilities. But the continuing violence in the country
shows why Iraq, like Afghanistan, needs more troops, not fewer.

The wider question-mark comes with Mr Bush's own moral claims. He says
his battle is not just a military one but also an effort to promote
democracy and human rights. Yet he has too often undermined that
effort. For example, Mr Bush has courageously called for the
establishment of a Palestinian state, but has done virtually nothing
to bring one into being. Israel's assassination of Sheikh Yassin,
murderous as the Hamas leader was, drew only grudging criticism.

Moreover, despite the outpouring of sympathy in Europe for America
after September 2001, Mr Bush's country now finds itself more resented
by its main allies than ever before. Much blame for that should fall
on European leaders stirring up anti-Americanism. All the same, in
America's last great moral war, against communism, it became the
champion of human rights through the Helsinki Accord; this time, the
face of American justice is Guantanamo Bay and the trampling of civil
liberties.

To a large extent, it is true, this president has been tidying up
messes that his predecessors either created or failed to deal with
merely better than Mr Kerry. That is a choice Americans must make
later this year. And so, eventually, will this newspaper. 
