Lexington 

Boiled Rice

Apr 1st 2004 
From The Economist print edition 

She did the right thingd that she would testify after all. 

Ms Rice's refusal to appear before the commission in public was not
just knuckle-headed; it was a public-relations disaster. It allowed
Richard Clarke, Mr Bush's former terrorism expert who has turned on
his erstwhile masters, to seize the moral high ground; instead of Mr
Clarke being pummelled for disloyalty, as the White House had hoped,
the media coverage has focused on Ms Rice's obstinacy. Her refusal to
talk also infuriated many families who had lost loved ones on
September 11th. And it gave the impression to everybody except the
most diehard Republicans that the administration has something to
hide. 

The more the White House tried to smother the controversy, the more it
fanned the flames. Ms Rice's preferred compromiset something fishy was
going on. Why act like a mute nun when it comes to speaking to a
blue-ribbon commission and then be a compulsive motor-mouth on CBS and
ABC?

It is tempting to blame most of this on the White House's
image-manipulators. But Ms Rice is an intelligent enough person to
know that the song she was being asked to sing sounded dangerously out
of tune. She argued that her appearance before the commission would
violate th e of executive privilege. National security advisers serve
at the president's pleasure, so they don't have to be confirmed by
Congress. In the past, they have appeared before Congress only to deal
with political accusations, not to explain administration
policy. Zbigniew Brzezinski testified before the Senate Judiciary
Committee about Billy Carter's relationship with the Libyan
government, but Henry Kissinger did not have to explain the
administration's strategy in Vietnam (in fact, he never appeared
before Congress at all when he was national security adviser).

The White House's enthusiasm for executive privilege is
understandable: Mr Bush inherited an executive branch that had seen
its powers relentlessly undermined since Watergate. But it was surely
a mistake to engage in a turf war with a commission that is charged
with investigating one of the tragedies of American history,
particularly when the turf war is not as cut-and-dried as Ms Rice
maintained: the September 11th commission is not actually a
congressional body. Indeed, by picking such an unwinnable fight, Ms
Rice has arguably undermined the principle of executive privilege that
she claimed to be fighting for.



Condi's promise
Can Ms Rice's flip-flop put things right? A great deal hangs on the
quality of her performance. On the talk shows she has let her personal
irritation with Mr Clarke ruffle her feathers, but Ms Rice is an
eloquent speaker, with a sure command of her brief. Yet, from the
White House's point of view, even a stellar performance will probably
recover only some of the ground lost. Whatever she says, the Democrats
will still point out that Mr Bush's adviser had to be dragged kicking
and screaming to Congress when she should have been happy to testify.

From Ms Rice's own point of view, her coming appearance will be a
pivotal one in her career. She has briefly been in the eye of the
storm once beforency.

Yet the past week has shone the spotlight on Ms Rice's weaknesses. Her
composure can sometimes come across as coldness, particularly when she
is dealing with an emotional subject such as September 11th. As for
her competence, it is plainly an exaggeration to claim, as Mr Clarke
does, that she was unprepared for the post-September 11th world. She
had given warning of the growing threat of biological and chemical
weapons, and of terrorist networks. Yet, equally plainly, her main
interest lay in the old world of great powers and realpolitik. She was
sharply hostile to nation-building, now at the heart of her
portfolio. Now that terrorism has become the main focus of American
foreign policy, the logical Ms Rice has had a hard time dealing with
the huge (and highly emotional) disagreements that have torn the Bush
cabinet apartinger would have been able to control such big political
beasts as Donald Rumsfeld and Colin Powell in the wake of September
11th. Ms Rice still enjoys the most valuable resource in Washington