South Korea 

South by south-east

Apr 1st 2004 | SEOUL 
From The Economist print edition


Regionalism could be on its way out
  
Get article background

THE impeachment of President Roh Moo-hyun could well turn out to have
a positive effect. South Korea may be ethnically homogeneous, but turf
politics has historically divided the electorate along geographical
lines. With the majority of South Koreans opposed to the president's
removal, however, some analysts are suggesting that the impeachment
issue could ease the deep-rooted regionalism that has dogged the
country for decades ., says Kim Soo-Jin, a political scientist at Ewha
university ,

The most pronounced regional cleavage is between Kyongsang in the
south-east and the Cholla region in the south-west. Successive
military dictators, including Park Chung-hee, originated from
Kyongsang. In power, they funnelled a disproportionate amount of
investment into the area, and people from Kyongsang were largely
promoted over their south-western neighbours in public office and in
government. Kyongsang developed into the country's industrial
heartland. Cholla, on the other hand, was left out in the cold and its
people stigmatised and disadvantaged, along with their long-term
champion and Mr Roh's predecessor, Kim Dae-jung.

This largely politically-engineered divide became more visceral after
the country's military leadership brutally suppressed a 1980 rebellion
in Kwangju, the capital of south Cholla. Following Mr Kim's victory in
the 1997 presidential elections, the favouritism previously shown to
the inhabitants of Kyongsang was replaced by the promotion of those
who originated from Cholla. 

Today, South Korea's political parties reflect this geographical
divide. The Millennium Democratic Party (MDP), founded by Mr Kim, has
traditionally had its stronghold in the Cholla region, while the
conservative Grand National Party (GNP), which traces its roots back
to South Korea's military dictators, has its support base firmly
planted in Kyongsang. 

The election in 2002 of Mr Roh was heralded by some as a welcome
easing of regionalism. Despite Mr Roh's origins in Kyongsang, Cholla's
voters gave him their backing. Ironically, he performed rather well
everywhere except on his home turf. 

Mr Roh's acrimonious defection last year from the MDP and the crisis
over his impeachment have further complicated the regional
picture. Nationwide, seven out of ten South Koreans say they oppose
the impeachment. In the legislative elections, due in two weeks, the
desire to punish the parties responsible for the impeachment could
well override traditional regional loyalties. The MDP, which was the
driving force behind the impeachment bid has seen its popularity
plunge in its traditional stronghold of Cholla. 

In the shifting sands that pass for South Korean politics, support for
an issue or a manifesto, rather than loyalty based on regional ties,
would mark a welcome change. Caution is advised, though: old enmities
die hard.

