Economist/YouGov poll 

Choosing to choose

Apr 7th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


 
The government is right to stress choice in public services, as a
specially commissioned poll shows and evidence from Scotland (see
article) illustrates

HOW popular is choice? It sounds a silly question. The government and
the opposition Tories agree that choice is the way to improve
Britain's cash-thirsty and underperforming public services. Both want
to encourage new service providers into the health and education
markets to spur competition and generate new capacity. The
government's plans rest on imaginary money following pupils and
patients, while the Conservatives say they want to go one step further
by handing out vouchers (with several strings attached) to help pay
for operations or schooling. The next election could be decided by
which of these competing visions voters prefer.

Now, however, it is being suggested that the whole idea of more choice
about schools or health care leaves most people cold. If so, that
would cast doubt on the strategies both of Labour's modernisers and
Michael Howard's newly self-confident Conservatives. In particular, it
would boost Labour traditionalists who are hostile to Tony Blair's
commitment t o public services.

Focus groups and private polling commissioned by the parties
supposedly show voters as sceptical about more choice. Most seem
prepared to settle for local schools and hospitals as long as they are
adequate. Tory pollsters found that being able to have an operation in
a hospital near one's home was much more important than
choice. Although respondents were interested in being offered more
control over how they were treated, they didn't think choice had much
to do with it. 

That chimes with a fashionable new book ,, by Barry Schwartz, an
American social psychologist. Too much choice, he argues, ends up
making us miserable because we worry about getting it wrong, while
settling for th e makes us happy. Professor Schwartz deals mostly with
markets for goods like coffee, where a cornucopia of choice exists,
and financial services, which consumers find intrinsically
muddlesome. But the defenders of the public-service status quo have
cheerfully appropriated his arguments.

To shed some light on the debate, The Economist asked YouGov, an
internet pollster, to put some questions about choice and public
services. The findings, based on a representative sample of more than
2,000 voters, contradict the claim that choice matters more to policy
wonks than real voters. 

In a revealing answer to our first question (see chart), only a
minority (37%) thinks that the NHS needs extra money, while 50% say
that without reform the NHS would be unable to give patients more
control over their treatment. Although split fairly evenly between
those who thought that health care and educational standards overall
would rise if there was more choice and those who thought it wouldn't
make much difference, crucially, very few (about 14%) thought that
standards would fall. That matters: critics maintain that gains for
some would be at the cost of others, thus offending the public
services' cardinal principle of equity. 

 
 
 

 


Asked about the standard of treatment they or their family would
receive given more choice, the message was similar: 42% thought it
would rise; 43% thought it wouldn't make much difference; 9% thought
things would get worse. The age range that least needed convincing
about choice was the 45-to-64-year-olds, particularly as far as health
was concerned. Out of this group, which tends to pay the highest taxes
and will be the next big users of the NHS as age creeps up on it, 55%
thought that standards in hospitals would rise if there was more
choice. Across all ages, 66% reckoned that it was either very
important or fairly important to have more choice in health care,
while 76% felt the same way about education. 

Predictably, Tory voters were keener on more choice, but a third of
Labour voters were also convinced that it would make services
better. What should worry the government is the perception that it
will do less to promote choice than the Tories. Only 19% thought that
Labour would, if re-elected, deliver more educational choice against
41% for the Conservatives. 

By contrast, while 55% expected spending on health to be higher under
Labour, a third thought the Tories would also spend more. That's good
news for Mr Howard because it suggests that the Conservatives may not
only be more trusted to deliver the next stage of public service
reform, but are also getting over the message they will not cut
services.

These intriguingly different results reflect the questions
asked. Other polls put choice alongside practical issues such as
waiting lists or the proximity of a good hospital. That risks muddling
ends and means . is not a good thing in itself, but a way to improve
services.

That is what Mr Blair has been arguing to his party. Voters are
entitled to some scepticism until there are improvements for all to
see. But most are prepared to give choice a chance, while few see any
conflict between the notion of the empowered consumer and the
principles of equity and universalism. For the political parties, the
risks of not pushing forward the choice agenda appear much higher than
persevering with it.
