Indonesia 

Punching the white snout

Apr 7th 2004 | JAKARTA 
From The Economist print edition


AFP 
 
 

 

The early results bode ill for the president, but secularism remains
intact

Get article background

IT WAS one of the biggest elections ever held, and also one of the
most complicated. On April 5th, some 140m Indonesians at more than
595,000 polling stations chose between almost 450,000 candidates
competing for 15,276 offices. Voters had to grapple with four separate
newspaper-sized ballots to select members of both chambers of the
national parliament, plus provincial and local councils. The results,
which will not be finalised for another two weeks, will also determine
which parties can nominate candidates for the presidential election in
July. The tally so far suggests that Indonesians, although
dissatisfied with their current, largely secular, government, are not
tempted by Islamic alternatives. Instead, they are plumping for
smaller parties, leaving the presidential election, and Indonesian
politics in general, particularly unpredictable. 

As The Economist went to press, less than 15% of ballots had been
counted. President Megawati Sukarnoputri's Indonesian Democratic Party
of Struggle (PDI-P) was neck and neck with Golkar, the political
vehicle of Suharto, Indonesia's former strongman, with 20% each. But
those figures are likely to change, since rural areas, which are
slower to report, vote differently from cities. By the same token,
Java, the country's most populous island, tends to opt for different
parties than the rest of the Indonesian archipelago. 

Before the vote, most polls were predicting that PDI-P's support would
plummet from the 34% it received in the previous election, in
1999. Such a drop would leave Golkar as the biggest party, but would
also benefit several smaller parties, such the newly-founded Democrat
Party, and the Prosperous Justice Party (PKS). A representative sample
of the actual results, compiled by a consortium of Indonesian and
foreign NGOs, bears this scenario out. It projected Golkar leading
PDI-P, by 23% to 19%, with another five parties, including the
Democrats and PKS, above the 5% threshold needed to nominate a
candidate for the presidency. 

These percentages, however, do not translate directly into seats in
the 550-member DPR, the main chamber of the national parliament. The
system of distribution favours bigger parties over smaller ones, and
those which perform well in the outer islands over those which do best
in Java. Golkar, as both the biggest party in general and the
strongest force in the outer islands, is likely to win an even higher
proportion of seats than votes. 

All this leaves the presidential election wide open. In theory, the
candidates of PDI-P and Golkar should have an advantage over those of
smaller parties. But Golkar is likely to field Akbar Tandjung, the
current speaker of the DPR, whose reputation has suffered from a
series of corruption scandals, while the PDI-P's slump bodes ill for
Miss Megawati. Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono, the leader of the Democrat
Party, is now in the running, while an alliance of Islamic parties
including the PKS would make a good showing. To make matters yet more
opaque, Indonesia has never held a direct presidential election
before, making it hard to predict whether voters will remain loyal to
the party they supported in the parliamentary election. But no
candidate seems likely to win 50% of the vote, so the election will
proceed to a run-off on September 20th. 

 
 
 

 


When all the dust has settled, however, the tenor of Indonesian
politics will probably remain much the same. After all, if the
projections are correct, fewer than 40% of Indonesians voted for
Islamic parties an Islamic party, wa s At election rallies, comedians
and dancers took centre stage; the politicians muttered brief
platitudes about economic growth and national pride before cracking a
few jokes or bursting into song themselves. Although the Democrats and
the PKS, among others, did denounce the current government, their
criticisms centred more on corruption and drift than on specific
policies. 

But the most remarkable thing about the vote is that it took place at
all. The government was so worried that the election commission would
not manage to distribute the ballot papers and boxes on time that it
prepared an emergency decree to delay the elections. In the end, all
but the remotest corners of Indonesia voted as scheduled. What is
more, polling went peacefully, even in strife-ridden provinces such as
Maluku and Central Sulawesi. Despite dire predictions, few would-be
voters complained of disenfranchisement due to flawed registration
procedures. Turnout was high, and voters coped well with incredibly
complicated ballots, thanks in part to a massive voter-education
drive. All that is quite a triumph, considering that this is only
Indonesia's third free election for the lower house of parliament in
50 years, and the first for the new upper house. It is also a relief,
given that the country faces two more votes this year.



