Christians and Jews 

Russian table talk

Apr 7th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Spiritual divisions in a good Jewish family

LEV RAZGON, a chronicler of the Soviet prison camps, was a humanist
with no formal faith but a deep belief in human rights, such as
freedom of conscience. Younger members of his extended family have
taken full advantage of those freedoms.

The writer's nephew, Alexander Razgon, is a devout Jew who has settled
in Israel; Alexander's brother Leonid, like a small but influential
trickle of Russian-Jewish intellectuals, is an Orthodox Christian. To
give another example from another family, Father Georgy Edelstein, an
Orthodox priest of Jewish origin, is a courageous ex-dissident who
said the atheist Soviet state had no moral claim on his loyalty. His
son Yuli is an Orthodox Jew who, as a conservative Israeli politician,
does indeed recognise an earthly homeland.

Because of Russia's history of official atheism and anti-Semitism,
there are few countries where Jewish-Christian relations present so
many paradoxes. During the Soviet era, when Christians were still
harassed, a high proportion of those who professed that faith publicly
were ethnic Jews. Now that Orthodoxy has become a sort of state
religion, its ranks have refilled with nationalistic Russians, many of
whom were once cheerful Soviet atheists. 

Religious Jews have an explanation fo r: in Communist times, when
Soviet Jewry was mainly secular, Christianity provided
spiritually-minded Jews with the only available access to their own
heritage. Orthodox Christians of Jewish origin see it differently:
with its solemnity and antiquity, the Orthodox Christian rite (when
stripped of chauvinist nonsense) reconnects them deeply with the
priests and prophets of ancient Israel. It makes for some lively
family discussions.



 
