The Amazon 

The price of success

Apr 15th 2004 | SCO PAULO 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

Does Brazil have to choose between economic growth and preserving the
endangered Amazon?

Get article background

DURING the 1970s and 1980s, when Brazilian governments were determined
to colonise the country's last frontier, they pumped subsidies into
the Amazonian interior. Today, the forces driving deforestation in
Brazil are different: where once the logging and farming that eroded
the forest served mainly the domestic market, it is now the demands of
consumers in Europe and Asia that are driving have jumped more than
five-fold. Many of the extra cows are grazing on land that was once
rainforest($137m ), praised by environmentalists for making
deforestation the business of other agencies as well. The plan
stresses enforcement of existing laws an d. It calls for making
deforestation of public land a crime and for tackling the vexed issue
of land titles to make it easier to control its use. The idea is t o
says Mr Capobianco, and encourage farming on the area the size of
Suriname that has been cleared and then abandoned.

There is a debate among conservationists about how effectively the
government can reall y, and whether to try . says David Kaimowitz of
CIFOR. Some experts think that the ranchers and soya farmers can't be
stopped, but can be taught to take better care of the land they
occupymise between greenery and growth possible. Indeed,
environmentalistsvancy, an NGO. It is an appealing vision of
rapprochement between the economy and the environment. The future of
the Amazon may depend on achieving it. 



