Robots

Robots, start your engines

Mar 11th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

Innovation: Could a robot race funded by a military-research
organisation help to advance the development of autonomous fighting
vehicles?

AMONG government organisations, America's Defence Advanced Research
Projects Agency (DARPA) has always been somewhat unusual. As the
research arm of the Department of Defence, it is akin to a high-stakes
venture capitalist, gambling large sums of money (its estimated 2004
budget is $3 billion) on risky technologies that will probably fail,
but could pay off in a big way. It has had some stupendous successes,
such as the internet, the Saturn rocket and micro-electro-mechanical
systems (tiny machines that work at the scale of a human cell). There
have also been some resounding duds, such as the Total Information
Awareness project, a Big Brotherish plan to spot terrorists by combing
through databases of personal information, which was swiftly
abandoned.

But what is arguably DARPA's most outlandish scheme yet will start
rolling on March 13th, when a gaggle of strange-looking vehicles will
line up in Barstow, California to make a wild run across 250 miles of
scrub and desert. They will be heading, fittingly, towards Las Vegas,
where gambling and high stakes are as common as hotel-buffet
specials. DARPA calls this race the Grand Challenge. What makes the
race so grand, and so much of a challenge? The lack of humans.


Not a single person is permitted to be at the wheel (or remote
control) of any of the racing contraptions. Each machine in the
contest must reach the finish line unaided, within ten hours, or die
trying. The first vehicle to cross the finish line within the allotted
time will win its human creators a cool $1m the idea and quickly began
to explore technologies that might be prize-worthy. After much
discussion, Anthony Tether, DARPA's director, decided in 2002 that the
first DARPA prize should challenge researchers to solve the stubborn
problem of building land vehicles that navigate and drive themselves.

There were good reasons to do this. For one thing, Congress has
decreed that by 2015, one-third of America's combat ground-vehicles
must be autonomous. Furthermore, engineers and scientists have spent
years, and millions of dollars, grappling with this problem without
success. Driving through rough, unpredictable terrain requires
machines with sensors and computational capabilities that no one has
been able to devise. So DARPA's staff worked out the format for the
competition, the prize money was put on the table and the Grand
Challenge was born . Dr Tether said when he announced the prize.

That was the idea, at least: to fire up the enthusiasts, geeks and
robot evangelists huddled away in the American hinterlands, and give
them a shot at applying their collective genius to problems normally
left to corporate giants such as Lockheed, General Dynamics and
Boeing. But DARPA was far from certain that the citizen inventors were
actually out there . says Jan Walker, a DARPA spokeswoman. 

Enthusiasm, however, was not a problem. By early 2003, 106 teams had
emerged from the ranks of university students, robot clubs and
off-road-vehicle enthusiasts. Of these, 86 presented scientific papers
containing the detailed technical specifications DARPA required, and
19 were accepted to participate in a four-da y (QID) to be held five
days before the race. Another 26 entrants were judge d. To quell
grumbling among these teams, DARPA offered each one a visit before
making a final decision. This offer was accepted by 19 teams, six of
which made the cut. However, says Ms Walker, any or all of the teams
could be wiped out in the QID.

Teams of every stripe have been formed, from Alaska to Lafayette,
Louisiana. One group from Palos Verdes, California, consists mostly of
high-school students, but is not to be underestimated, because many of
the students' parents work in the aerospace industry. Another group,
Team Phantasm, is based in St Louis and consists of an inveterate
tinkerer and a semi-retired computer programmer who have big plans but
shallow pockets. Despite meagre resources, the duo have devised a
creative flower-petal design that will right their vehicle if it flips
over during the race, in much the same way that an insect gets back on
its feet when turned over.

Insiders suspect that three teamsion, a truck-maker). The Mojave is
filled with cactus plants, boulders, ravines and ruts . Dr Whittaker
says with a grin ,

Who will win? Probably no one this time around, although the agency is
more optimistic than it was a year ago that one of the teams might
manage to claim the prize, according to Ms Walker. But even without an
outright winner, there may be rewards of other kinds for those who
compete. There are plenty of people in industry and the military who
want to solve the autonomous-vehicle problem, says Ms Walker, and they
will be watching the race closely.

Besides, says Dr Whittaker, the race is not really about the money. It
is about doing something that's never been done before . he
says. Which is somewhat ironic, when you consider that the race is for
robots only. 


