Spain 

Terror before an election 

Mar 11th 2004 | MADRID 
From The Economist print edition


Reuters 
 
 

 

A co-ordinated series of bombings sows carnage in Madrid

Get article background

COMING just three days before a general election which the ruling
conservatives now seem even more likely to win, it was the worst
terrorist outrage of recent times in Western Europe. In a series of
co-ordinated blasts in three railway stations in Madrid, including its
biggest one, Atocha, at least 170 people were reported to have
perished in the morning rush-hour. 

The Spanish authorities were quick to say that the perpetrators were
members of ETA, the Basque separatist group, which has been using
terror for more than 30 years in its campaign to win full independence
for the already autonomous region of north-western Spain. Josi Marma
Aznar, the outgoing prime minister, vowed to crush thi s.

This would be easily ETA's biggest act of bloodshed, far worse than
the death of 21 people it blew up in a supermarket in 1987. Indeed,
the scale of the attack and the apparent absence of a warning prompted
speculation that this might not be ETA's work. ETA, moreover, has
almost always claimed responsibility for its deeds. This time, Arnaldo
Otegi, a politician close to the movement, denied that the group was
responsible, pointing a finger instead at th e. 

The sad truth is that Spain is a target for both kinds of
terrorist. Mr Aznar has been a leading supporter of America' s and has
backed the Americans, with troops, in Iraq (and the anniversary of
that war falls next week). On the other hand, only two weeks ago
Spain's security forces seized a huge load of ETA explosives destined
for Madrid. Last December Spanish police said they had foiled an ETA
plot to blow up a train in a Madrid station. And in the summer police
arrested an ETA cell that had planted explosives on a railway track
outside Madrid. 

In any event, the scale of the attack has shaken and angered
Spaniards, including Basques, as never before. In the past eight
years, under the People's Party (PP), Spain has gained in
confidence. Its economy is buoyant, having grown at an annual average
of 3.6% for the past seven years. Its standing on the world stage is
higher. And, under the stern Mr Aznar, it even seemed to be getting on
top of the Basque terrorists. Last year, ETA, which has killed over
800 people in the past 30-odd years, managed to kill only three. 

So the attack has served as a painful reminder that Spain's regional
animosities are unresolved. Beating terrorism has been a priority for
Mr Aznar. Both his PP and the security services reckoned that ETA was
on the ropes after two years of successes on both sides of the
Franco-Spanish border. The group was known to have wanted to pull off
a spectacular to show that it still counts. In the last general
election, four years ago, its political arm won almost 8% of the votes
in the Basque region. But Mr Aznar banned it two years ago.

Yet if this was an ETA attack, it may smack of desperation. Under the
auspices of Mr Aznar's anointed successor, Mariano Rajoy, the PP has
been cruising towards its third election victory in a row, with latest
opinion polls giving it a lead of around six percentage points. The
question in politicians' minds was whether Mr Rajoy and his party
would be able to form a government on their own or whether they would
have to team up with a regional partner, such as the conservative but
moderate Catalan nationalists. Now the PP has a better chance of
ruling alone.

Even then, regional politics would be likely to create continuing
tension. In the election run-up, the Basque regional premier, Juan
Josi Ibarretxe, of the non-violent Basque Nationalist Party that
dominates in the region, has continued to promote a plan for a
referendum on the Basques' claimed right to self-determination. The
aspirations of both Basques and Catalans to wrest more power from the
centre, and the PP's fierce opposition to such notions, have created
unprecedented crispacisn, or political tension. 

This had already risen sharply earlier this year when it was revealed
that the Catalan regional government's number two, Josep Llums
Carod-Rovira, a left-wing nationalist whose party is in a ruling
coalition with the Socialists in Catalonia, had secretly met ETA
leaders with a view to brokering a ceasefireocialists will not make
such claims now. But their chances of taking office next week, in
Madrid, look even slimmer. 

