Economics focus 

Why welfare?

Mar 11th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


An important new book traces the links between politics, racial
diversity and the generosity of the state 
 
 
 

 
NOTHING better encapsulates the different attitudes of America and
Europe to the poor than a table towards the end of Alberto Alesina's
and Edward Glaeser's remarkable book*, due to be published later this
month. It compares the prevalence of three beliefs: that the poor are
trapped in poverty; that luck determines income; and that the poor are
lazy. The first is held by only 29% of Americans but by 60% of
citizens of the European Union; the second, by 30% of Americans and
54% of Europeans; and the third, by contrast, by 60% of Americans and
24% of Europeans.

Mr Alesina and Mr Glaeser, both Harvard economists, are doing what the
best in their profession do well these days: seeking to explain
society not merely with conventional economic tools but with analysis
of institutions, geography and social behaviour. They begin with the
observation that America and Europe differ strikingly in their
willingness to allow government to redistribute income from rich to
poor. Government spending in the United States is about 30% of GDP; in
continental Europe, where it includes most health-care spending, it is
about 45%. Almost two-thirds of this spending is on
welfare. Americans, by contrast, are much more likely to give money
privately. They appear to have given $691 per head in charitable
donations in 2000, compared with contributions of $141 in Britain and
a mere $57 in Europe as a whole. 

What explains the difference in welfare systems? It is patently not
true that European redistribution redresses greater pre-tax
inequality: Americans' gross incomes vary more than Europeans'. Maybe
America is less unequal than it seems, because today's poor are
tomorrow's rich? No, actually: the authors point out that America's
poor are just as trapped in poverty as Europe's, whereas the European
middle class climb the social ladder as easily as their American
counterparts. Maybe Europe's tax collectors are more efficient than
America's ? say the authorsin Europe have undergone turbulent
political change in the past century; America has at least the bones
of a structure created more than two centuries ago. Europe's upheavals
have installed proportional representation in most countries, a
structure that has facilitated the growth of socialist and communist
parties . they argue. 

Geography also bolstered the power of labour in Europe and restrained
it in America: in a small country like Belgium, labour unrest could
have a much greater national impact than in a vast, dispersed country
like the United States. So did the fact that Europe's countries saw a
century of war, whereas America's geography and might protected it
from invasion. Countries that saw war on their territory were more
likely to acquire new political institutions, and ones that gave more
power to the left.

Such institutional differences, the authors guess, are half the
explanation for the contrasting approaches to poverty. But, they point
out, institutions ar e. Those economists who regard political and
legal institutions as given, rather than examining the forces that
create and sustain them, are missing something important. 



And then there's race
The other half of the explanation lies in America's racial
diversity. In spite of 20 years of unprecedented immigration, European
countries, particularly smaller ones like Portugal and those of
Scandinavia, are still highly racially homogenous. America, by
contrast, has great diversity, which is especially wide in some
states. In addition, the poor in America are disproportionately
non-white. Non-Hispanic whites are 71% of America's population but
only 46% of the poor.

Racial diversity in individual states is correlated with the
generosity of welfare. For instance, the authors find that in 1990 Aid
to Families with Dependent Children ranged from over $800 per family
per month in mainly white Alaska to less than $150 in Alabama and
Mississippi, where almost one-third of the population is black. Even
after adjustment for inter-state differences in average incomes, the
correlation with race remained strong. Across countries, too, racial
diversity goes with low government spending on poverty relief.

The reason, argue the authors, is tha t, and they marshal statistical
evidence, much of it from opinion surveys, to back this up. People are
likely to support welfare if they live close to recipients of their
own race; but are antipathetic if they live near recipients from
another race. The divergent attitudes of Europeans and Americans to
the poor are underwritten by the fact that the poor in Europe tend to
be ethnically the same as most other folk. In America, their skin is
often a different colour.

The authors say tha t, eager to use race as an excuse to turn the poor
against redistribution, shape attitudes to race and to poverty. At
different times, America has had its share. Is Europe immune? Look at
the successes of the likes of Jvrg Haider and Pim Fortuyn, and
wonder. The recent evolution of Europe as a destination of mass
migration, much more ethnically diverse than America's in most of the
past century, will test the durability of the European welfare state.

