Blair and Qaddafi 

Tony Blair's big tent

Mar 25th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Why Tony Blair went to visit Muammar Qaddafi
AP 
 
 
Tony's new friend
 
THE timing of this trip could hardly have been more
controversial. Twenty-four hours after joining grieving Spaniards for
a mass to commemorate the victims of the worst terrorist outrage in
Europe since 270 people died at Lockerbie in 1988, Tony Blair was
sitting in the tent of the man widely supposed to have sponsored the
destruction of Pan Am flight 103. 

The Tory leader, Michael Howard, quickly condemned the distasteful
juxtaposition. Other critics demanded that the prime minister should
confront the Libyan president, Muammar Qaddafi, about Libya's
appalling human-rights record, its bankrolling of Robert Mugabe's
rogue regime in Zimbabwe and the lack of progress in bringing to
justice the person responsible for the murder of Yvonne Fletcher, a
policewoman killed during a siege at the Libyan embassy in London 20
years ago. 

On that issue, Mr Blair made some progress: British police will fly to
Libya next month to investigate the murder. And a statement from Jim
Swire, a spokesman for some of the Lockerbie families, also helped Mr
Blair. Mr Swire said that, if Libya really was turning its back on
terrorism, his group supported Mr Blair's efforts. Mr Blair is
convinced that this is so. In August last year, Libya admitted
responsibility for the Lockerbie bombing and agreed to pay $2.7
billion in compensation. But more recently, it decided to abandon its
pursuit of weapons of mass destruction.