Forever young

Mar 25th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


More people will grow old this century than ever before. That will
change the nature of retirement, says Frances Cairncross

SOMETHING unprecedented and irreversible is happening to
humanity. This year or next, the proportion of people aged 60 or over
will surpass the proportion of under-fives. For the rest of history,
there are unlikely ever again to be more toddlers than grey
heads. Already those aged 65 or over, who throughout recorded time
have rarely accounted for more than 2-3% of most countries' people,
make up 15% of the rich world's inhabitants. 

So this is the start of what the Japanese (who will have a million
centenarians by mid-century) call th e. Most middle-aged people find
it hard to think of themselves as part of this trend. When, in 1996,
the first members of America's vast generation of baby-boomers reached
50, many were aghast to find on the doormat an application form from
the American Association of Retired People (AARP). A generation that
still pictures itself as rebels in blue jeans is bemused by the notion
of imminent old age. For this correspondent, due to turn 60 later this
year, the moment of truth came in a paper by a (youthful) academic :


The rise in the proportion of the world's old will be the century's
defining demographic trend. In some countries it may also determine
the nature of politics, rates of economic growth (ageing countries
will have slower rates of growth per head than those with younger
populations) and global clout. In fact, three trends are running in
parallel, each at a different pace. The first is a bulge in
retirement, which will become noticeable in just over a decade. In
many countries, especially in America, the birth rate rose sharply for
some years after the end of the second world war. The older members of
the American baby-boom generation are due to turn 62 (the minimum age
at which Social Security allows early retirement) in 2008. The last
baby-boomers retire in the late 2020s. But the generation, like a pig
in a python, will guarantee an unusually large proportion of old
folkountries, mainly in continental Europe and Japan, birth rates have
been below replacement for a quarter of a century. When the
baby-boomers retire, the size of the working population will plummet. 

That in itself is worrying enough. But there is a third problem: the
old spend much more time in retirement than ever before. Life
expectancy continues to rise, yet people are drawing their pensions
earlier and earlier. A century ago most old people worked almost up to
the end of their days. Now, by the age of 65, only 16% of men are
still in the workforce in America and only 4% in continental Europe. 

Thus, a larger generation of old folk than ever before will need
support for longer than ever before from a population of working age
that is shrinking continuously in absolute size for the first time
since the Black Death. And the level of that support is
unprecedented. The triumph of Europe's welfare state and America's
Social Security system has been more or less to eradicate poverty
among the old. All rich countries a study of demographic change calle
d, thinks that China's leaders will find it hard, after years of
relentless growth, to adjust to a fall in the population of working
age from the middle of the next decade. 

In a decade's time, many countries thus start to face a huge problem:
how to support a vastly larger population of old folk. There are only
three ways to provide income in old age: one, to store goods for later
consumption, which in practice doesn't work (just try storing a
hip-replacement operation); two, to exchange current production for
claims on future production, by saving or by extracting promises from
your children or the government; and three, to go on producing
yourself. 



Better than the alternative
This survey will argue that the promises governments have made to
people retiring today are too large to be met in full. As a result,
people will have to work longer, and retire later, than they do
now. And the old will have to insure themselves for more of the cost
of health care.

Fortunately there is a time window, of about a decade, during which
the population of working age will be at a historic high. Projections
by the OECD in Paris show that the impact of retiring baby-boomers
will not begin to be felt until the next decade, and will culminate in
2025-35. So governments have a chanceess expensive than ever before. 

The longer that countries postpone the steps needed to make retirement
sustainable, the more abrupt and damaging the transition will be. But
given the will, change is possible. Pioneering work by two American
economists, Jonathan Gruber and David Wise, has shown that retirement
decisions are greatly influenced by the structure of pensions and
other benefits. If it pays to stop working, people will. Driven by
fiscal desperation, governments will increasingly steel themselves to
alter the way benefits work. 

Once that change begins, there will be jobs for those who want
them. When the baby-boomers start to retire in large numbers, they
will empty out workplaceshat, in the course of the 1970s and 1980s,
brought millions of mothers into the job market. Since then, the
workplace has been feminised; in future it will be grizzled. A quarter
of a century from now, retirement will look different from the way it
does now: a mix of work and gardening, rather than gardening
alone. For older people, work may then offer some of the charms that
have lured so many women into the job market: stimulus, companionship
and the freedom from worry that a bit of extra money can bring. 


