Australia 

Iraq strikes again

Apr 1st 2004 | CANBERRA 
From The Economist print edition


Has the opposition leader blundered?

Get article background

WITH an election expected later this year, and the opposition Labor
Party powerfully invigorated under Mark Latham, its latest leader, the
prospects for John Howard winning a fourth term as prime minister have
been looking a bit dim of late. Youthful and dynamic, and deftly able
to steer the political agenda towards issues such as health and
education, where Labor resonates strongly with voters, Mr Latham has
opened up a commanding lead for the party over Mr Howard's
conservative coalition since he took over the leadership just four
months ago.

That dream run may now be ending. Apparently emboldened by a sense
that Australians wanted to put their military contribution to the war
in Iraq behind them, Mr Latham said on March 23rd that, if Labor wins
the election, he will bring the troops home by Christmas. There were
echoes of the Spanish election on March 14th, soon after terrorist
bombings in Madrid, and the pledge by Josi Luis Rodrmguez Zapatero,
the Spanish leader-elect, to withdraw Spain's troops from Iraq. Mr
Latham went further: unlike Mr Zapatero, he did not attach as a
condition for leaving the troops there the possibility of the UN
taking more responsibility in Iraq. 

He announced his plan in a Sydney radio interviewority in Iraq in
July, he said, a Latham government would be hoping to have the troops
back by Christmas: hardly revolutionary, given that Labor originally
opposed the Howard government's despatch of troops to take part in the
American-led invasion. Australia has about 850 troops in the Gulf
region; Mr Latham's withdrawal plan involves only the 350 or so
serving in Iraq.

Yet this was enough to provide Mr Howard with the chink in Mr Latham's
armour that has eluded him so far. He went for it, accusing Mr Latham
o f, and o f.

Mr Latham hit back in kind, calling Mr Howard a politician at the end
of his career. He said he had concluded after a briefing from a top
intelligence official in January that the government's policy in Iraq
was a n.

There were signs, however, that some of Mr Latham's colleagues were
taken by surprise by Mr Latham's pronouncement. Kevin Rudd, the
probable foreign minister in a Latham government, was quick to qualify
his leader's remarks by saying Labor saw a strong moral commitment to
Iraq's economic reconstructionpsyceh. Yet he may also be overstating
the degree. It is entirely probable that Australians want their troops
to stay in Iraq for the time being, mainly to help the Iraqis restore
their lives rather than to shore up a relationship with Washington
that many feel has grown a bit too deferential under Mr Howard.

For his part, Mr Latham risks being cast as a leader impulsively
reacting to events. He made hi s remark days after Mr Zapatero's
promise, and another opinion poll that showed 65% of Australians
believed their country's involvement in the Iraq war had made a
terrorist attack in Australia more likely. 

The polls are sending mixed signals. While Mr Latham's rating fell
five points, Labor overall increased its lead from eight to ten
points. Either way, Mr Latham has opened up the biggest policy gulf so
far between Labor and the government.



