Methane on Mars 

A sign of life?

Apr 1st 2004 
From The Economist print edition


A mystery in the Martian atmosphere

Get article background

HOW did that get there? This week it emerged that three groups of
scientists have independently found traces of methane in the Martian
atmosphere. Vittorio Formisano, of the Institute of Physics and
Interplanetary Space in Rome, detected it using a spectrometer on
board Mars Express, a European probe orbiting Mars. This confirmed
preliminary results announced last year by Michael Mumma, a researcher
at NASA's Goddard Space Flight Centre in Greenbelt, Maryland, who has
spotted methane using Earth-based telescopesy, and biological
activity.

Methane is found in comets, one of which could have crashed into
Mars. But there is no sign of a recent impact. The methane might also
have come from volcanoes. But Mars is generally thought to be
geologically inert, since even the newest-looking lava fields on the
surface are millions of years old, and orbiting space probes have not
found an y in surface temperature. Dr Formisano suggests that the
methane might instead be the result o f, such as the slow release of
gas from volcanic fissures or geothermal vents. But it is the third
possibility that is most intriguing: that the methane is the result of
biological activity. Most of the methane in the Earth's atmosphere was
put there by bacteria that produce it as a by-product of the decay of
organic matter.

Distinguishing between these possibilities will not be easy. Dr
Formisano says he is looking for evidence of geographical variations
in the distribution of methane. Then, he says, a future rover could be
sent to the appropriate region to examine the methane using a mass
spectrometer. It might be able to distinguish between biological and
non-biological methane by examining the ratio of two forms of carbon,
one of which (on Earth, at least) is associated with biological
activity. Scientists searching for life on Mars may, it seems, have
picked up a whiff of their quarry.



 
