Arab democracy 

Imaginable?

Apr 1st 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Despite its summit fiasco, the Arab world is groping for democracy

AP 
 
 

 


NOTHING better illustrates the distress of the Arab world than the
muddle, buck-passing and recrimination that attended this week's
last-minute postponement of the Arab League's annual summit in
Tunis. For sure, such meetings have in the past all too often
distinguished themselves by the sanctimonious irrelevance of their
declarations and a readiness to blame others, especially the United
States and Israel, for the region's home-grown failings. But at least
the organisers usually ensure that representatives of the 22 countries
put on a show of unity, albeit by issuing anodyne statements
invariably buttressed by that oldest of friends, the lowest common
denominator. This time even that stalwart helpmate deserted them.

Given the Arab League's less than impressive history, is the fracture
in its unity now a good or a bad thing? One mooted reason for the
disarray was that Tunisia's president, despite his own lamentably
undemocratic record, was outraged by the failure of his fellow Arabs
to agree upon an agenda to include even an implicit welcome to the
Americans' worthy call for democratic change in the region. He
declared the meeting over before it had begun. Representatives of the
member countries may yet gather in a month or so, though no one quite
knows where. Meanwhile, in the eyes of the 280m-odd Arabs, a world
that often seems hostile to them will chuckle over yet another
self-imposed humiliation.

That is a pity, for, under the customary blanket of denial and
blather, tentative but unmistakable stirrings of democracy and genuine
self-analysis are appearing across the Arab world (see article). The
region is unusually ripe for change. One reason for the curmudgeonly
reaction of many Arab rulers is that this, for many of them, could
mean the chop. Another is that the most recent impulse towards greater
popular participation has come from outsideted Arab effort to
acknowledge past failings would be particularly timely. Two admirably
candid reports in the past few years written by Arab academics for the
UN's development programme, and testifying to the link between
political repression and economic backwardness, have powerfully
underscored the need to loosen up. Arab help is sorely needed, too, to
regenerate the near-moribund Israel-Palestine peace process; its
continuing bloody stalemate casts a blight across the entire region,
fuels a glum reluctance to do anything that Israel's American friends
might propose, and provides an excuse to stifle Arab democracy at
home. 

An inability to embrace greater democracy is not inherent in Islam
witness progress in Turkey, but also in Malaysia and Indonesia. There
is no reason why Arabs cannot do likewise. But if their rulers cannot
even agree to discuss such matters, outsiders may be forgiven for
querying their proclaimed determination to make their countries
worthier of respect.

