Science and the Bush administration 

Cheating nature?

Apr 7th 2004 
From The Economist print edition



The Bush administration has been accused of manipulating science. It
is now fighting back

HOWEVER much its practitioners might wish otherwise, science is
inevitably political. A lot of it is funded by taxpayers. Most of it
has enormouss react badly to threats to their intellectual
integrity. So when such a threat is perceived to come from the world's
biggest funder of scientific research political manipulation of
scientific research and information, and of scientific advisory
committees to the government. 



He said, they said

One example cited in the UCS report involved William Miller, a
psychologist and psychiatrist at the University of New Mexico. He said
that when he was being interviewed for a position on a National
Institute on Drug Abuse advisory panel, he was asked whether his views
agreed with those of Mr Bush, and whether he had voted for him in
2000. Another is that of William Howard, an engineer who says that he
was told by a member of the Army Science Board staff that his
nomination to the board was turned down because he had contributed to
John McCain's presidential campaign. (Ironically, he had not done sohe
increased funding given to scientific research by the Bush
administration. It then went on to state that he believed the
accusations in the UCS report were inaccurate and, furthermore, are
not indicative of a sweeping trend.

Some of Dr Marburger's responses look justifiedeconstituted. As to the
accusations of committee-packing, Dr Marburger's rebuttal merely
states that the UCS report is wrong in all instances, without
explaining why.

Yet the accusations have continued to proliferate. One of the most
notorious cases since the release of the report is that of Elizabeth
Blackburn, an eminent cell biologist at the University of California,
San Francisco. She was fired from her position on the President's
Council on Bioethics because, she claims, of her outspoken support for
research on human embryonic stem cells, a promising but controversial
medical technology. 

In an essay in the April 1st issue of the New England Journal of
Medicine, Dr Blackburn describes how her point of view, which she
believes reflects the scientific consensus in America, was not
included in the council's reports even though those reports were
supposed to represent the views of all the council's members. The
American Society for Cell Biology, a professional body, protested at
Dr Blackburn's dismissal. It was met with a denial written in the
following day's Washington Post by Leon Kass, the council's chairman
(and a Bush supporter) that politics had played a role. The panel, Dr
Kass said, was still representative of all shades of opinion. Some
critics found this denial unconvincing, as the panel remains short on
actual biological researchers, and long on members who have publicly
expressed extreme religious views.

Another incident involved Howard Gardner, a psychologist at
Harvard. Dr Gardner said in a radio interview on March 4th that Wayd
Horn, an assistant secretary of the Department of Health and Human
Services, struck his name and those of three colleagues from the list
of speakers at an education conference co-sponsored by Mr Horn's
department. Mr Horn gave no explanation for his decision, although he
was eventually forced to apologise for disinviting the scientists. But
all four disagreed with the administration's policy that four-year-old
children in the government' s education programme must be given
standardised tests, and Dr Gardner thinks this is no
coincidence. Indeed, incidents like this led him to say of Dr
Marburger ,



Dangerous games
Analysis of such a disagreement can, as this sort of name-calling
suggests, easily devolve into a children's game of th e variety. But
the open letter and the UCS report cover a lot of ground. Climate
change, the value o f sex education (which prohibits any mention of
contraceptives) and the promotion of a non-existent link between
breast cancer and abortion are all areas where questionable procedures
are said to have been employed. In all these cases, Dr Marburger's
response has failed to convince most of his critics. 

To the extent that it is aimed at environmental and bioethical
questions, which have long divided America on party-political lines,
this disagreement could be seen as business as usual. However, it is
not limited to those fields. There is a widespread feeling among
scientists that Mr Bush is ignoring scientific results and opinions he
does not like in other areas, too. In August 2003 the House of
Representatives Committee on Government Reform made claims similar to
those of the UCS report. But it also observed widespread scientific
unease about the feasibility of the missile-defence systems proposed
by the administration. This report has gone unanswered by Dr
Marburger, as has a report made in July 2003 by the American Physical
Society (APS), a professional organisation for physicists in
America. The APS report concluded that boost-phase missile defence,
one element of the system planned by the Bush administration, would be
ineffective.

These are serious accusations. Suppressing research into stem cells is
causing that research to move abroad, which will damage America's
biotechnology industry. But that will not be fatal to America's
future, and opponents of stem-cell research might argue that it is a
price worth paying for their beliefs. Monkeying with defence is a
different matter. America's current military prowess has been
achieved, in large part, because the country has listened to and
lauded its physicists and engineers. Spending billions on technology
that most of them believe will not work is, at the least, a dubious
approach. Politicians can cheat nature no more effectively than
scientists can.

