Christians and Jews 

The season of the lambs

Apr 7th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Bridgeman 
 
 

 

Christians are trying to analyse their responsibility for anti-Jewish
prejudice, and to examine their own faith's Jewish roots

Get article background

FOR the Judeo-Christian world, this is the week. For Jews,
celebrations of Passover or Pesachthe lamb's blood which the Jews in
Egypt daubed on their doors to escape the angel of death. All over the
Christian world (this is one of those years when the western and
eastern halves of Christendom celebrate on the same date), the story
of Easter or Pascha, which draws deeply on Passover symbols, is being
relived. As people hail the resurrected Jesus Christ, they rejoice in
their own redemptio n. Thus, in many corners of the world, there is
talk of lambs being slain, either literally, or as a metaphor for God
incarnate. 

For many centuries, the Christians' season of hope was a time of fear
in Jewish ghettos, as religious fervour spilled over in murderous
anti-Semitic violence. Now, though the demon of anti-Semitism is far
from deadrgely brought about by the deep and searching dialogue
between leaders of the Christian and Jewish faiths, as both traditions
struggle to make some spiritual sense of the unspeakable horrors of
the Nazi death camps.

A token of the new Jewish-Christian understanding is the passage into
common, unselfconscious use of the term Judeo-Christian to describe
the religious heritage of the western world. Even now, admittedly, the
word is not problem-free. Colin Powell, America's secretary of state,
stumbled into a controversy last autumn when he said of Iraq that it
wa s. Out of deference to Americans of other religions or none, Mr
Powell quickly corrected himself, sayin g. 

American Muslims nonetheless protested strongly, pointing out that in
certain ways found to describe the commonality between all three
monotheistic faiths.

But Mr Powell's use of the term does reflect something real in recent
religious history. Over the past half-century, Christians have tried
harder than at any time in the previous two millennia to analyse their
own faith's responsibility for anti-Jewish prejudice and violence; and
to look at their own faith's Jewish roots.

According to Mark Silk, an American scholar who has studied the
Judeo-Christian concept in political parlance, the term has always had
a rhetorical purpose. Its first use as a sort of political slogan was
by President Dwight Eisenhower, in 1952, in a clarion call for a long
war against Soviet communism .



A word of many meanings
As Mr Silk shows, this was not the first meaning of the term. It had
come into currency before, and during, the second world war, to imply
a tolerant kind of Christianity, and to eschew the Christian
anti-Semitism that had a following among Roman Catholics in the 1930s.

Much later, in the cold war's final phase, the term Judeo-Christian
was sometimes used as a counterpoint to secular humanism. Even more
recently, it has been used in contrast to spoken of the Jews a s of
the Christians; and, earlier this year, he received Israel's chief
rabbis at the Vatican. Under his guidance, the Catholic Church has
wrestled harder than beforend renders irrelevant, the older covenant
between God and the Jewish people.

In this Protestant world, a concept calle d has been pioneered by a
German philosopher, J|rgen Moltmann. He has argued that the Jewish
rejection of, and Christian acceptance of, Jesus as the Messiaht or
much worse. 

Jewish readings of the Holocaust see a direct link between Christian
anti-Semitism and the crimes of the Nazis. Jews acknowledge the role
o f in mitigating the horrors, but these are treated as subsidiary
facts only. Stories of gentile courage render Christian-Jewish
dialogue possible, but do not make it easy.

Indeed, thorny new questions have risen since 1945. Among many
Christians who have gone at least halfway towards withdrawing claims
o f, there is often deep unhappiness over the policies of Israel. This
is in part because the main Christian denominations have Palestinian
adherents who have suffered dreadfully during the conflict. 



Israel's curious friends
Fundamentalist right-wing American Christians, such as Pat Robertson
and Jerry Falwell, do still believe in supercession. They insist
strongly that people must make a commitment to Jesus Christ in order
to gain salvation and avoid damnation. Yet these Christians are not
simply pro-Israel; they identify with the toughest parts of the
Israeli spectrum. Last December, Mr Robertson used a speech in Israel
to denounce the principle of a Palestinian state. Calling Israel's
military prowess  a, he told his hosts they would be letting the side
down if they succumbed to the principle of land for peace.

Such talk enrages Palestinian Christians, who feel that compared with
other faiths in the regionight may be Israel's loudest backer, but its
social agendaeply into the internal debates of the other. 

According to Alan Segal, an American Jewish scholar at Columbia's
Barnard College who has published nearly a dozen books on
Christianity ,



Quarrelsome cousins
What is it, then, that Christians fail to realise about the nature of
their own Jewish antecedents? One way of putting it would be this:
Judaism and Christianity are not so much parent and child, or even
siblings, as some romantic formulations would suggest; they are more
like quarrelsome cousins with some very different readings of family
history.

By the end of the first Christian century, as people responded to the
trauma of the Jewish Temple's destruction by the Romans, there were at
least two new forms of religious practice in Roman Palestine:
Christianity and rabbinical Judaism. The latter was a relatively
simple form of Jewish worship which placed emphasis on ethics and law,
and dispensed with the need for a hereditary caste of priests.

AP 
 
 
Have you heard the one about...?
 


It is from rabbinical Judaism that modern Jewish practice descends. On
the other hand, the imagery used by Christians, whether they realise
it or not, is steeped in the world of the Jewish Temple.

Scholars like Mr Segal, and Britain's Margaret Barker, have shown that
many teachings of Paul, who fashioned Christianity into a world
religion, can hardly be understood without reference to Temple
mysticism. This applies to Paul's account of his own transcendental
experiences; to his teaching on resurrection to eternal life, as a
state of being which i s but quite different from ordinary physical
life; and above all, to his description of Jesus as th e whose
self-sacrifice transcends all others. 

Thus, while Christian teaching draws deeply on the mysticism in the
religion of Israel, the modern expression of Judaism has been
influenced by patterns of thought which come from the secular or
post-Christian West. 

Then there is the problem over texts. It is a commonplace of
Jewish-Christian dialogue that both have a common root in the Hebrew
Scriptures which Christians call the Old Testament. But in the early
Christian centuries, there were furious arguments between Christians
and Jews over the precise wording of Hebrew texts, with each side
accusing the other of doctoring manuscripts to suit its own case.

Jews accused Christians of addin g references to ancient texts, while
Christians complained that Jews were removing such references. Those
arguments were reopened by the Dead Sea Scrolls, whose discovery 50
years ago provided a huge body of evidence on the history of
monotheism. 

In some ways, the scrolls have blurred the contours of
Jewish-Christian discussion. Simply put, the new finds have shown,
more clearly than before, the diversity and range of beliefs and
practices in the Jewish world of 2,000 years ago. Jesus and his
followers were by no means the only people who questioned the
worthiness of the high priests who were guarding the Jewish Temple;
nor were they the only people who sought a more authentic form of
communion with God by retreating into the desert for asceticism and
prayer.

So whatever was happening in Roman Palestine at the time of Christ, it
was not a simple two-way contest between Jesus and the Jewish
religious authorities; there were plenty of other people, then and
before, who looked to the Temple as the ultimate source of holiness,
but felt that its present incumbents were unworthy.

So much the better, one might think, for Jewish-Christian dialogue: it
might even be argued that the two faiths were points on a spectrum
rather than opposite poles. But there are still hard questions for
anyone who takes the Hebrew Scriptures seriously. Jesus pronounced
that all the law and prophets were fulfilled in his person; that is
either an offensive piece of blasphemy or one of the most important
statements ever made.

None of this matters at all to those who, like Eisenhower , about the
content of religions but do care about their moral effect: in other
words their ability to galvanise Jews, Christians and other decent
people against a common enemy (whoever that might be) and stop them
quarrelling with each other.

In that context, the term Judeo-Christian serves an important
ideological function. But as the current heated debate over Mel
Gibson's fil m shows, terminological tricks alone will not prevent
ancient religious differences from resurfacing in highly contentious
ways.



Approach with broken heart
What, if anything, can be done to ward off that danger? Perhaps it
will help if Christianity and Judaism regard one another not as
monoliths but as complex spiritual systems which meet and diverge in
many different places . Christians, such as German Protestants, feel
much in common with the cerebral world of rabbinical Judaism. And
among mystically minded Christians and Jews, there can be unexpected
points of encounter.

In the mystical traditions of Christianity and Judaism (and indeed
Islam) there is much reflection on the principle o f. This is not
meant in the ordinary sense of sadness or despair. It is a spiritual
state in which the hard shell of arrogance and self-centredness that
encases the human heart somehow melts away in order for the light of
divine love to come flooding in. 

Through much of Christian history, Christians and Jews have
encountered one another through the prism of arrogant, worldly
power. If Christians can approach Jews with broken hearts which is not
the same as abandoning their own beliefs the tragedies of history may,
at some level, be transcended.
