Israel and Palestine 

Might Hamas ever negotiate?

Apr 7th 2004 | JERUSALEM 
From The Economist print edition


The violent Islamists of Hamas may be changing their tune

Get article background

HALFWAY through the Jews' eight-day Passover holiday, Israelis were
nervously awaiting the lash of Islamist retribution. Palestinians
expect more violence too. Penned inside their towns and territory by
the Israeli army, restrictions against them have been tightened since
Israel's assassination last month of Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, leader of
the Islamist Hamas movement. 

EPA 
 
 
Rantisi's new tune
 
What can senior Palestinians do to help stop the cycle of violence?
Officials of Hamas and other Palestinian factions, including Yasser
Arafat's Fatah group, have been meeting in Gaza City to discuss how to
respond to the decision last December by Israel's prime minister,
Ariel Sharon, to withdraw from all or most of the Gaza Strip, the
disconnected coastal part of a would-be Palestinian state, within a
year or so. The Palestinians may be about to change their tactics.

Dr Abdelaziz Rantisi, Sheikh Yassin's successor as leader of Hamas,
which is particularly strong in Gaza, has generally been thought even
fiercer in his determination to fight for the destruction of
Israel. He has also been less keen to co-operate with Mr Arafat's
Fatah group or with the Palestinian Authority (PA), which is supposed
to run the fledgling state and which Mr Arafat now heads. Dr Rantisi
has sworn revenge against the Israelis for killing the sheikh. Israel
tried to kill Dr Rantisi last June and may have another go. 

But Hamas under its new leader is staking out three positions. First,
unlike the PA, which views Mr Sharon's Gaza withdrawal plan with
trepidation, Hamas extols it as a victory for armed struggle. So,
according to pollsters, do Palestinians of all political
stripes. Second, Hamas says it will hold its fire in Gaza, though not
necessarily in the West Bank (the bigger part of a Palestinian state)
or in Israel proper, once the Israeli withdrawal begins. Third, Hamas
says it wants a ne w with its rivals who run the PA, particularly Mr
Arafat's Fatah, enabling them to run Gaza together once the Israelis
go.

This last proposal marks a change. In the past, Hamas has refused to
join a PA administration since the authority is bound by the terms of
the Oslo accords of 1994. Hamas rejected these accords, not least
because they called for the suppression of armed movements such as
itself. More recently, however, Hamas has begun to shift . says a
senior Hamas man. 

Why the change? Pollsters now reckon that Hamas, thanks both to its
armed campaign against Israel and to its welfare network, is the most
popular group in Gaza. At the same time, Fatah is in disarray and the
PA has lost just about all its authority. Hamas sees some sort of
power-sharing as a useful way to prepare for new Palestinian
elections, where it can translate its popularity into political
power. 

Other powerful Palestinians have reached similar conclusions for
different reasons. Mr Arafat now says he would welcome Hamas in the
PA. Mohammed Dahlan, a Fatah man who used to run the PA's strongest
police force in Gaza, is also in favour. In 1996 his police launched a
massive clampdown on Hamas. Mr Dahlan gave up his job two years ago,
but has long argued that Fatah should keep Hamas down, while Mr Arafat
has often wavered. 

But Mr Dahlan may be changing tack too . he now says . If new leaders
were readier to talk to Hamas, he says, the PA could reassert control
over the Gaza Strip and the West Bank. Israel's government and its
American allies are dead against the idea. Mr Sharon has banked on
destroying Hamas's Gaza leadership, by assassination if need be, as
the price of Israel's withrawal. Yet clobbering Hamas has not
prevented its rise. Some secular-minded Palestinians, such as Mr
Dahlan, now seem to think that the way to contain Hamas is by helping
it to change from a fighting movement into a political party, opposed
doctrinally but not militarily to Israel's existence. 

If, runs this argument, the Palestinians were able freely to elect
their leaders, including some from Hamas, they might be able to make
the PA a more efficient body with a better chance of re-establishing
order among the Palestinians. The PA, with Hamas within it, might then
be better able to control the violence (and stop the suicide-bombs,
among other things) and allow negotiations with Israel to resume. 

