Israel and Palestine 

Don't give up hope 

Mar 25th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Despite Sheikh Yassin's killing, negotiation is both vital and
possible 
AFP 
 
ON THE face of it, the cycle of violence and bitterness just keeps
getting worse. Certainly, in the short run, Israel's assassination of
the wheelchair-bound Sheikh Ahmed Yassin, arguably the most popular
and for now the most iconic Palestinian leader of them all, is going
to beget still more bloodshed. Hamas, the Islamist Palestinian
movement which Mr Yassin led, may now try to display reach as well as
rage, by adding civilian targets abroad to those inside Israel. Yet,
through the smoke, the outline of the only sensible compromise,
providing for two independent and viable states, is as plain as
ever. The sheikh's killing must not obscure this prospect, which most
Israelis and Palestinians accept in principle. If only enough of them
could agree on how to make it a reality.

Why, then, did Israel's prime minister, Ariel Sharon, do it? His first
answer is that the sheikh, far from being  a leader, as he is ritually
and misleadingly described, was the iminence grise of a movement that
routinely distinguishes itself by the hatefulness of its language, the
vile intolerance of its vision, and the indiscriminate murderousness
of its methods, all in the cause of ridding the world of Israel. But
why now? True enough, last week's attack by Hamas, which killed ten
civilians in the Israeli port of Ashdod, came near to blowing up
chemical storage tanks that might have cast a lethal cloud of poison
across a wide area. But murderous and provocative attacks have been
happening for a good three years. 


Mr Sharon had other reasons, this time, for wielding his iron
fist. His recent decision to evacuate most Israeli settlements from
the Gaza Strip, a fetid bit of coastline that houses 1.2m wretched
Palestinians and makes up the lesser part of the would-be independent
state of Palestine, means he will have to boot out the 7,500-odd
Jewish settlers who live there. This has infuriated many of Mr
Sharon's most ardent disciples on Israel's religious and secular
right. It is causing ructions in his own Likud party and may well
destroy his coalition, forcing him either to team up with the Labour
opposition or to call new elections (see article). Killing the sheikh
was one way to tell his assorted constituentsrsities. Hamas's declared
aim is Israel's destruction, and it opposed both the Oslo peace
process and the internationa l. Yet it has on occasion been more
pragmatic than its ideology suggests. Hamas has observed intermittent
ceasefires, albeit shortlived ones. More important, the sheikh had
intimated of late that if Palestinians who want a two-state solution
were to win an election, he would call off his suicide bombers, while
continuing, peacefully, to argue for an Islamic state. 

The Israelis are fond of saying they have no reliable Palestinian
interlocutor willing to impose the ceasefire that is the starting
point of the road map. It is an irony, then, that the sheikh's
assassination is likely to put Yasser Arafat back in the spotlight,
despite Mr Sharon's repeated assertion that the Palestinians' elected
leader will never be worthy of dialogue again. However much they
revile him, many Israelis would now like the more secular-minded
Palestinians, most of them still loyal to Mr Arafat, to take advantage
of Hamas's setback. Yet it will be harder still for him to reassert
his supremacy among Palestinians, with so many of them demanding fiery
unity in the face of a seemingly implacable Israeli enemy. For sure,
it is much to be desired that a younger generation in Mr Arafat's camp
should take over. But Mr Yassin's killing does nothing to further that
goal.



What next in this unholiest of lands?
For the time being, few outsiders can help much. Those Arabs who wield
influence over the Palestinians will be loth, for the moment, to sound
in the least bit amenable to Mr Sharon. It had been hoped that, at the
Arab League's annual summit in Tunis next week, a mood of helpful
moderation would prevail. The kind of initiative gamely promoted two
years ago by Saudi Arabia's Crown Prince Abdullah, with an explicit
offer to recognise Israel if it withdrew to the ceasefire line of
1967, might have been repackaged as a token of Arab goodwill. The best
one can now hope for is that the Arab world refrains from endorsing or
even helping Hamas's jihad. 

The Americans have done far too little to persuade Israelis and
Palestinians to negotiate since they unfurled that road map two years
ago. The conventional wisdom is that a president will do nothing in
the run-up to his hoped-for re-election. Maybe so. But Israel's
promised withdrawal from Gaza, itself a good step, especially if it
were co-ordinated with Palestinians, offers a chance to bring the
sides back into co-operative mode. The mayhem likely to ensue in the
wake of Mr Yassin's demise makes that harder. But the Americans, with
Europeans at their side, must do their utmost to re-engage.

More hopeful is the dawning realisation by Mr Sharon and many in Likud
that a Greater Israel that gobbles up much of the West Bank is
unsustainable and that only the creation of a real Palestinian state,
roughly along the pre-1967 armistice lines, has a chance of bringing
peace. Mr Sharon has enraged the right wing of his own party by
accepting the inevitability of a Palestinian state. But he still
clings to the false idea that the Palestinians can be bludgeoned into
acquiescence, cooped up behind a barrier that eats into much of their
territory in a series of ghettoes that is no real state at all. For
peace to come, Mr Sharon will have to drop that idea, just as Hamas
will have to give up the idea that it ca n the whole of Palestine by
waging a murderous terrorist war on Israel's civilians.

