Oil prices 

Shocking

Mar 25th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


Oil prices are not as high as they look, nor yet a big threat to
economic growth
 
CRUDE oil prices topped $38 a barrel last week, their highest since
October 1990. They have since slipped back slightly, but prices at
America's petrol pumps are now at their highest ever. This has
prompted some economists to start fretting about rising inflation or
even a sharp slowdown in growth. They should relax the moment.

This is not because oil no longer matters. Economies still rely on
it. The world may use less oil per dollar of real GDP than before, but
a big increase in prices would nevertheless harm oil-importing
economies. 

So far, however, the increase has not been as large as it looks. Oil
prices this week were roughly a third higher than their average level
in the four years to 2003. That is much less than the tripling of oil
prices in the 1970s, in 1990 and again in 1999-2000. These rises were
big enough to help cause global economic downturns. But following the
latest rise, real-dollar oil prices, after adjusting for inflation,
are less than half their peak in 1980. Furthermore, part of the recent
rise reflects the weaker dollar, in which oil is priced. In euro
terms, oil prices are barely higher than their average of the past
four years.


Nevertheless, more expensive oil means that inflation will be higher
and output a bit lower than otherwise. As a standard rule of thumb, if
the $10-a-barrel increase in the price of oil seen over the past year
is sustained, then it will increase inflation in rich economies by
half a point, and knock a quarter point off GDP growth this year. The
impact on energy-intensive emerging economies, such as China, will be
still larger. 

Goldman Sachs calculates that, if oil prices stay where they are, this
will reduce personal disposable income in America by only $15 billion
in the six months to June compared with a year ago. That reduction
would be more than offset by tax cuts of $70 billion. By mid-year,
however, those tax cuts will end. American inflation has started to
edge up, but a big jump is unlikely while the labour market and wages
(a bigger slice of firms' costs than oil) remain weak. And a small
rise in inflation would hardly be a disaster: the core rate of
inflation (excluding energy) is, if anything, too low in America,
while average global inflation stands at 2%, the lowest for half a
century. 

Previous jumps in the oil price were usually caused by a sudden supply
disruption as a result of a war or a revolution. This both raised the
cost of producing other goods and reduced demand for them because
consumers had less real income. The current price rise is not due to
supply cuts (see article) but largely to strong demand for oil in
America and China, inflated perhaps by some speculation. And the usual
negative impact from higher oil prices is being partly offset by
increased demand generated by the same factors that are boosting oil
prices: the weak dollar and rapid growth in China are also spurring
American exports. If higher oil prices cause firms in China to trim
their investment a bit, that would be no bad thing. China's current
pace of growth looks unsustainable.

Even though recent oil-price rises are less ominous than they look,
complacency would be unwise. Oil prices have tripped up economies too
often in the past. Current prices are unlikely to do much harm, but if
they keep rising, confidence could be hit and stockmarkets could also
take a tumble. That could be enough to halt America's fragile
recovery. Too much of America's recent growth has been built on an
unsustainable boom in household borrowing and house prices. It could
so easily skid on a patch of oil.

 