Rwanda since the genocide 

The road out of hell

Mar 25th 2004 | KIGALI 
From The Economist print edition


AP 
 
 

 

Rwanda is tranquil: a staggering achievement. But the way the
government enforces peace is disturbing

Get article background

 So says Oreste, a peasant, sitting by a dirt road amid the banana
 trees. He adds that everyone he knows feels the same way. But as we
 left, your correspondent's driver put on sunglasses and pulled up his
 hood. He didn't want to be recognised, he said, by the people who had
 murdered his father and 4,500 of his neighbours.

Ten years after the genocide, Rwanda is at peace, on the mend and
outwardly serene. This is an astounding achievement, given what the
country has suffered. In the 13 weeks after April 6th 1994, between
500,000 and 800,000 Rwandans were murdered. It was perhaps the fastest
genocide in history, although the killers were mostly armed, not with
guns or poison gas, but with farm tools. 

Today, practically every Rwandan has friends or relatives who either
died or took some part in the killing. And yet they live together,
Hutus and Tutsis, on the same green hills, with barely a whisper of
trouble. The nation appears uncannily united. The president, Paul
Kagame, won 95% of the vote at an election last year. Oreste says that
everyone in his village supports the government, without exception.

 he says. Most Rwandans talk like this. If they harbour dissenting
 views, they keep quiet about them . says a Hutu teacher . says a
 Tutsi businessman, glancing nervously over his shoulder, though we
 are in a private booth in a noisy restaurant. 

Rwanda's government is unique in Africa in that it tries to control
not only what its citizens do, but also what they think. Perhaps it
was inevitable. Mr Kagame shot his way into power in July 1994,
ousting the regime that was trying to kill every last Tutsi, and every
Hutu who refused to join in. With his army of Tutsi exiles, he stopped
the genocide. His party, the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), includes
both Hutus and Tutsis, but has one aim that trumps all others: to
ensure that genocide never recurs. That was never going to be a task
for the squeamish. 

When the outside world first became aware of the genocide, many
assumed it was a spontaneous outburst of hatred, a terrible expression
of ancient tribal passions in a country consumed by chaos. In fact,
the slaughter was meticulously planned and executed by one of the most
authoritarian states in Africa.



A history written in blood
Rwanda's two main tribes, the Hutus and the Tutsis, have skirmished
since pre-colonial times, but organised massacres are a modern
evil. There used to be a lot of movement between the groups, but the
Belgian colonists, who ruled from 1916 until 1962, judged that the
tall, thin Tutsis were superior to the shorter, flat-nosed Hutus, and
decided to rule through them. They deposed Hutu chiefs in favour of
Tutsis, favoured Tutsis in admissions to colonial schools, and created
a legacy of ethnic resentment. They also issued every Rwandan with an
ethnic identity card; these were to prove an invaluable tool for
ginocidaires who wanted to know whom to kill. 

Shortly before independence, the tribes' roles were reversed. Since
Hutus are a large majority, a Hutu party easily won an election in
1961, as the Belgians prepared to leave. It tried to impose ethnic
quotas: since Tutsis were estimated to be 9% of the population, they
were allowed only 9% of school places and salaried jobs. 

In 1973, power was seized by a general called Juvenal Habyarimana,
whose sole claim to legitimacy was that he was one o f. He stationed
spies everywhere, forbade his subjects from moving house without
permission and insisted that every man, woman and child should join
his ruling party. He discriminated ferociously against Tutsis, 600,000
of whom had fled the country by 1990.

Some joined Mr Kagame's rebel army, which invaded from Uganda that
year. Threatened by a mostly Tutsi army, some within the regime
decided that the only way to hang on to power was to exterminate all
Tutsis. Despite a peace accord in 1993, they recruited and
indoctrinated thousands of militiamen, and imported enough machetes to
give one to every third adult Hutu male. A pretext was found on April
6th 1994, when Habyarimana's aeroplane was shot down by unknown
assassins (see article).

The dead president's most bigoted associates, allegedly led by Colonel
Thioneste Bagosora, who is now on trial before an international court
in Tanzania, grabbed control and started killing. They harnessed the
state apparatus to their cause: local officials called meetings where
peasants were ordered to carry out acts o f against the rebels
'. Hutus who refused to kill were killed; those who showed the most
enthusiasm were rewarded with their victims' land or cows. A popular
radio station howled for blood. The world watched. 



A land of ghosts
Dotted around Rwanda today are dozens of memorials. The biggest, which
a British charity is frantically helping to complete in time for the
tenth anniversary of the killing, is to have dignified mass graves,
video exhibits and audiotape tours that will allow even the illiterate
to learn something. 

Other sites are cruder. In a church at Ntarama, south of the capital,
Kigali, the possessions of the dead have been left to rot where they
were dropped, between the wooden pews. Some 5,000 Tutsis sought
sanctuary in the church. The militia came and tossed in hand grenadesa
recalls with clarity the moment he first encountered Mr Kagame's
men. He was hiding in the bush, and he heard them shooting in the air
to attract the survivors' attention ., he says ,

Appalled at what they saw, the victorious rebels asked Tutsi survivors
to identify the killers. According to a suppressed UN report, the RPF
killed some 25,000-45,000 people between April and August 1994. Mr
Kagame's men then pursued the fleeing ginocidaires into the
rainforests of Zaire (now Congo), Rwanda's giant neighbour, where they
killed perhaps 200,000 more. In the process, they overthrew the
Zairean government, which had supported the ginocidaires, and stoked
the worst war that Africa has ever seen. 

The RPF is now out of Congo, and in unchallenged control of
Rwanda. Given the country's complete devastation in 1994, the new
regime has done a good job. Buoyed by ample foreign aid, it has
rebuilt the shattered school and health-care systems. Average incomes
are now roughly back to their pre-genocide level, having fallen by
half in 1994. 

Hundreds of thousands of Tutsi refugees have returned. Their economic
contribution has been vast: they brought cash and skills to a country
that had slaughtered most of its middle class. But their return has
also been socially disruptive. 

Many were born abroad, or had lived there since the first big Tutsi
exodus in 1959. Some, including Mr Kagame, arrived with only a basic
knowledge of kinyarwanda, the local tongue . now call the shots. It is
as if, in 1945, Germany had been conquered by an army of German Jews
who had lived all their lives in Britain.

The RPF is at pains to stress that it is not a tribal party. It has
abolished ethnic identity cards, and forbids the breakdown of official
statistics by tribe. Rwandans are encouraged to think of themselves as
one happy family; a courtesy that is extended even to Hutu rebels in
Congo who surrender and come home. 

These rebels are put through a re-education camp below the hills of
Ruhengeri, a scenic spot where tourists trek to watch wild
gorillas. The purpose of Camp Mutobo, says the boss, a Ugandan-bred
Tutsi called Frank Musonera, is to teach ex-fighters how to lead
productive lives in the new Rwanda. Having spent nearly a decade in
the bush, and having been taught by their commanders that Rwanda's
Tutsi rulers kill Hutus on principle, they face a culture shock when
they come home and realise that all is well, he explains. 

In two months at the camp, they are taught practical skills, such as
how to start a carpentry business or open a bank account. They are
also taught how to be what Mr Musonera call s. This includes imbibing
the RPF view of history1-year-old ex-guerrilla who had been in the
Congolese bush for ten years before coming to the camp, recites what
he has learned : Asked whether the RPF, against whom he fought several
desperate battles, has ever done anything wrong, Mr Habimana replies
without hesitation :

The message is drummed into civilian ears, too. All young Rwandans are
obliged to atten d where they are taught to love one another. Some
find it useful. Others less so . says Simon Gasibirege, a
psychologist. 



Obey, or disappear
To a casual visitor, Rwanda does not seem oppressive. Ministers are
not ostentatiously corrupt. The police do not routinely demand bribes,
and those who err are punished. But the RPF exercises tighter control
over the country than perhaps any other African ruling party.

 
 
 
Bagosora, the alleged mastermind
 
There is no freedom of the press, because that might allo w to spread
once more their foul ideology. There is no freedom of association,
either. Anyone who tries to set up a serious opposition party is
subject to harassment, arrest and threats that Rwandans take seriously
because they know their government can be ruthless when the occasion
demands. America's State Department reported no political killings in
Rwanda last year, but at least six opposition figures disappeared. 

Membership of the RPF is not compulsory, but prominent Rwandans come
under great pressure to join. The rigidly hierarchical system that
made the genocide possible still exists, albeit in a far more benign
form. The smallest administrative unit is of a mere ten
households. The head of each unit is likely to be urged to join the
RPF. Those who join must sign an oath of loyalty to the party, which
stipulates that they will be treated a s if they betray it. Those who
refuse to join may find that when they want something from local
government, officials are unhelpful.

Perhaps the most potent threat is of arbitrary detention. This is not
common, but Rwandan jails are so ghastly, and Rwandan trials so slow
about the events of 1994. Some of the confessions may be unreliable,
however. After a decade in cells so packed that inmates must take
turns to sit down, some doubtless tell their jailers what they want to
hear. And many Tutsis are unhappy to see their families' killers
moving back into the hut next door . asks one.

In 2001, to speed up the judicial process, the government began
organising village courts called gacaca (meanin g, which is where they
take place). The idea was that elected lay judges would hear testimony
from everyone in the village who witnessed the genocide, and hand out
prison sentences to those found guilty. The plan was widely hailed,
but has stalled. The poor do not like spending valuable working days
listening to evasive testimony. And Hutus feel bitter that gacaca
courts are barred from discussing events after July 1994, when the RPF
killed legions of their kin.

 says Ismail Mbonigaba, an opposition activist who says he fled death
 threats last year and who now lives in Uganda .

Meanwhile, back in Rwanda, the government is planning all manner of
sensible-sounding reforms. Donald Kaberuka, the finance minister,
talks enthusiastically of the need for faster privatisation and
sweeping land reform. Rwandan peasants do not enjoy formal title to
their land, so they cannot easily sell it or use it for
collateral. They must have property rights, he says. Given the
enormous refugee flows in and out of Rwanda in the past ten years,
won't it be difficult to establish who owns what? No, says Mr
Kaberuka. Perhaps he is right. The government has already persuaded
people to share their land with returning refugees, and to accept
newly released killers as neighbours.



Persuasion, only
Many rural people have been moved from their isolated huts to orderly
villages, where they are more likely to find a school, electricity,
and better security, according to the agriculture minister, Patrick
Habamenshi. The old regime used to tell people where to live, but this
is different, he says .

Mr Habamenshi dismisses the idea that Rwandans are afraid of their
rulers . he says. He ascribes the tight-lippedness of ordinary
Rwandans to their culture . he argues ,

What of the future? There will not be another genocide, thinks Alison
des Forges of Human Rights Watch, a veteran Rwanda-watcher. Genocide
requires control of the state, and those who control the Rwandan state
are unlikely to let go anytime soon. But given the instability of the
region, and the unresolved frustrations stopped up within Rwandan
hearts,  "there could be a resumption of violence, and that could take
ethnic turn."
