Charlemagne 

Dancing an Irish jig

Apr 15th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


EU newcomers will mimic the nimble Gaels will know the refrain :

The Irish-wannabes in central Europe are not thinking about the
delights of smoke-free pubs or Celtic music. Ireland has becom e for
those who believe that entering the Union can make you much
richer. When Irelan d in 1973, its per-capita income was just 62% of
the EU average; by 2002 it was 121%. Pat Cox, the Irish president of
the European Parliament, says membershi p

Yet EU membership does not automatically confer riches. Greece had a
GDP-per-head of 64% of the EU average when it joined in 1981, and by
2002 the figure was only about 70%. Even in Ireland, the miracle took
a while coming. In 1987e able to exploit their access to the EU market
and encourage a torrent of foreign direct investment. By 1998 American
multinationals accounted for 70% of Irish exports. The top corporate
tax rate, once over 40%, now stands at 12.5%; the state's share of
GDP, which hit 54% in the 1980s, is now down to 33%. Unemployment is
less than 5%.

These lessons have been eagerly absorbed in the new member-states,
where flat taxes and small government are now all the rage. Estonia
led the way by introducing a flat corporate tax rate in the
mid-1990s. Now Poland, Hungary and Latvia have all cut corporation tax
to below 20%. Slovakia has introduced a 19% flat tax for both
corporate and personal income. Combine low taxes with good basic
education and relatively low wagesall invested. Ivan Miklos, the
Slovak finance minister who has masterminded his country's reforms,
says confidently :

Ireland had some advantagesreseeable futureed to co-operate could be
deprived of the EU's regional aid to poorer places.

Such tax harmonisation, however, would have to be agreed unanimously
in the new EUlose their jobs. The middle class may find that prices
are rising, as indirect taxes go up to compensate for cuts in
corporate and personal taxes.

The political fallout can be nasty. In Poland, the prime minister has
just been forced out of office and Andrzej Lepper, a potato-throwing
populist, is riding high in the polls. In Slovakia, Mr Miklos insists
bravely tha t. But while the finance minister's determination is
unquestionable, ordinary Slovakians show signs of rebellion. In the
first round of the recent presidential election, they gave first place
to Vladimir Meciar, a backward-looking nationalist who is deeply
suspect in the rest of the EU. If populists like Mr Lepper and Mr
Meciar come to power in central European countries, investors are
liable to take fright. For the Irish recipe was not just low taxes and
small government. It also contained another vital ingredient investors
need to be able to take for granted

