Iraq's neighbours 

We told you so, but what now?

Apr 15th 2004 | CAIRO AND TEHRAN 
From The Economist print edition


America's embarrassed allies, and agitated foes

AMR MOUSSA, the Arab League's secretary-general, famously gave warning
that an American invasion of Iraq woul d. Ali Akbar Hashemi
Rafsanjani, a former president of Iran, predicted a quagmire. And on
the streets of pre-war Baghdad, a Palestinian resident assured your
correspondent that ordinary Iraqis would sit tight for the invasion,
give the Americans six months' grace, and then start shooting them. 

AP 
 
 
Taking a nuanced view of events in Iraq
 
Understandably, therefore, the region is chorusin g. But beyond the
grim satisfaction of feeling themselves proved right, Iraq's
neighbours differ greatly in appraising the mess, though they are all,
by and large, worried. None likes such untidiness next door.

The tarnishing of American prestige reflects directly and badly on the
governments of its allies: Turkey, Jordan, Egypt and Saudi
Arabia. What is worse, from their point of view, is that by recharging
the symbolism of popular resistance to alien rule, Iraq's creeping
intifada risks empowering the Islamist extremists who, to varying
degrees, threaten them all.

Israel, which was alone in backing the war wholeheartedly, has other
reasons to be anxious. An American failure in Iraq could create a
vacuum that Israeli analysts assume would be filled by forces hostile
to the Jewish state. Zeev Schiff, a seasoned Israeli military
correspondent, gives warning of eventual Iranian intervention, and
with it the unspoken spectre of possible nuclear weapons close to
Israel's own.

What Israel might do in such circumstances becomes, in turn, a worry
for Iran and Syria too, a worry to be added to the existing fear they
share with Turkey that a collapse in Iraq could lead to the creation
of a breakaway Kurdish state that would stir up their own Kurdish
minorities. Yet there are some within the Syrian and Iranian
establishments for whom the gain of hurting America outweighs other
factors. The shaky Baathist regime in Damascus is wise enough to keep
silent, but must surely feel that America's woes in Iraq are one
reason why the Bush administration has refrained from slapping
long-threatened sanctions on Syria. 

In a sermon last week, Mr Rafsanjani, who remains powerful among
Iran's conservatives, praised Muqtada al-Sadr's Mahdi Army, saying
that it was made up o f. But this does not mean that there is
co-operation, let alone trust, between the Iranians and Mr Sadr. Iran
sees him as a probable loser, and would rather have Grand Ayatollah
Ali Sistani on its sidelic opinion on Iraq had been confused. But the
mass killings in Fallujah, plus the stoking of pan-sectarian anger,
have once again produced a seemingly clear narrative. 

Press commentary, from the Gulf to Morocco, has noted, with striking
uniformity, the parallels between the Fallujah carnage and Israel's
efforts to crush Palestinian resistance. Mosque preachers across Saudi
Arabia, ignoring government instructions, add to each of the five
daily prayers a special supplication for God's aid to fellow Muslims
in defeating the enemy. And a group of 67 senior independent clerics
from some 20 Muslim countries has asked the international community to
halt the that shows America.


