Face value 

Getting Africa moving

Apr 15th 2004 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

Will Maria Ramos dare free-up the transport monopoly that retards
South Africa's economic growth?

IT IS a short drive on a congested road from Pretoria, South Africa's
political capital, to Johannesburg, its commercial one. But Maria
Ramos, who just moved her office from the former to the latter, has a
much longer and more difficult path ahead of her. Last year she quit
as head of the Treasury in Pretoria, after more than seven years
working closely with Trevor Manuel, the finance minister. Together
they deserve much of the credit for the broad macro-reform of South
Africa's economy: cutting debt, subsidies and inflation, and boosting
exports. Now, as boss of Transnet, the state transport monopoly with
fixed assets of 70 billion rand ($11 billion), she finally has the
chance to tackle some of the biggest micro-level obstacles to raising
the rate of growth of the country's GDP from an average of 2.8% a year
at which it seems stuck.

From her 50-floor building in downtown Johannesburg, Ms Ramos must
quickly find ways to kick-start creaking rail services, unblock
overwhelmed ports and relieve a debt-laden airline. It is an
unenviable task, and one so controversial that she has to be careful
about what she says while this week's general election is under way in
South Africa. 

Transnet is a giant by African standards. It runs freight, passenger
and commuter trains, it transports petrol and gas, and it operates and
owns ports and vast amounts of property androspects of improvement are
bleak without hefty new investment. More than 80 billion rand of
spending is needed in the next 15 years, says Ms Ramos, about half of
it on the slow, overloaded and unreliable rail network. New
locomotives, wagons, rails and lines are all needed. 

In her Treasury job, Ms Ramos encouraged fast expansion of
exports. Overseas sales of cars, catalytic converters, iron, steel,
coal, gold and other exports are steadily rising; but they are all
stuck in a tightening bottleneck. Coal producers want to shift more
than their existing 95m tonnes by train each year, but the rail system
cannot cope. The country's ports, especially the biggest in Durban,
are notorious for costly delays. Some investors talk darkly of going
elsewhere if the transport mess is not sorted out. Iscor, a
steelmaker, as well as car exporters such as Toyota and BMW, say they
might ditch South Africa's trains all together, or swap to rival ports
in Mozambique or Namibia.



Hard to do
Ms Ramos knows better than to go cap in hand to her old employer in
search of more state funds. She said in March that Transnet must cut
costs, not least by losing some of its 76,000 employees, especially
from the overstaffed head office. But it will take guts for a leading
member of the African National Congress, the party which runs the
government with trade union and communist allies, to sack people fast.

Ms Ramos also wants more private investment, through joint-ventures
and by selling of f. Talk of privatisation does not go down well with
voters, but she thinks some freight business, an internal
communications firm and the Blue Train (a luxury tourist service)
could be sold. But why not put the bigger and more lucrative parts up
for sale too? 

More details may be announced after the election. SAA, Africa's
largest and most successful airline, is expanding rapidly and would be
tempting for investors. A fifth of the airline was sold for 1.4
billion rand in 1999 to Swissair, but bought back for a bargain 382m
rand when the Swiss airline went bankrupt. If the country's ports were
privatised, they also might be better able to expand to meet
exporters' needs. A British firm runs Maputo harbour in Mozambique,
which is rapidly beginning to rival Durban. Portuguese-born Ms Ramos
told a local financial magazine in March that Transnet's
monopoly-happy managers have behaved for too long as if no rivals
would appear. Incompetence and high fees at Spoornet, the rail firm,
are chasing business on to roads instead. Private owners of the rail
firm would be less likely to behave that way.

But privatisation is painfully slow in South Africa. Though new
investments, such as privately run and excellent toll-roads, have
proved successful, Ms Ramos's political allies are wary of moving
fast. She talks of wanting an integrated company able to ship
everything from harbour or airport to city. In fact, it would probably
be far better if she could inject competition into transport by
breaking up monopolies. Privatisation could also raise cash for new
investments.
