Wal-Mart 

How big can it grow?

Apr 15th 2004 | FRANKFURT, LONDON AND VALLEY OF THE SUN, ARIZONA 
From The Economist print edition


AP 
 
 

 

The world's biggest retailer is defying its critics by continuing to
grow vigorously

Get article background

AT A recent retail-industry convention, Wal-Mart's boss, Lee Scott,
was asked whether his firm was trying to take over the world . Mr
Scott replied with a smile on his face .

How big can Wal-Mart grow? With $256 billion in sales in the year to
January 31st, the firm is already the world's biggest company by that
measure. Its nearest retailing rival, a French supermarket chain
called Carrefour, is less than half Wal-Mart's size. In America,
Wal-Mart manages nearly 3,000 giant discount stores and hypermarke
t. Abroad, it has ventured into Mexico, Britain, Japan, Canada,
Germany and China, as well as making smaller investments
elsewhere. Eight out of ten American households shop at Wal-Mart at
least once a year. Worldwide, more than 100m customers visit Wal-Mart
stores every week. Photographs circulated over the internet and
purporting to come from the Exploration Rover show NASA's recent
discovery of a Wal-Mart on Mars.

The mathematics of big numbers suggests that Wal-Mart's growth must
slow. Amazingly, the opposite appears to be happening. In America this
year, Wal-Mart intends to open some 50 new discount stores and more
than 220 new supercentres, some of which will be existing stores
moving to new locations. Overseas, it plans another 140 or so new
stores, including relocations. This adds up to some 50m square feet of
new space as does its ability to make money out of new retail formats
at home. Most important of all is the likely future growth of its core
domestic discount-store business, which makes up 65% of the firm's
sales and 87% of its profits. When will that begin to slow? 

One of the guiding principles of Sam Walton, the company's late
founder, is to pass on savings won from suppliers to consumers, which
encourages more of them to shop at the company's stores and to buy
more things. Wal-Mart then profits from higher sales, instead of
simply putting the savings directly into its coffers. The company is
skilled at obtaining products cheaply, and the emergence of China as a
centre of low-cost production is playing to its strengths. Wal-Mart
already buys $7.5 billion-worth of goods directly from China each year
and another $7.5 billion via its suppliers, with scope for more in
future. Shoppers make such big savings that economists credit Wal-Mart
with driving down America's inflation rate.

This strategy o f continues to surprise even Wal-Mart with its
success. When Tom Schoewe joined the firm as its chief financial
officer four years ago, Wal-Mart thought that its core discount-store
business was about to slow, he says. The company began looking for
other sources of growth by investing more heavily in different
formats: smaller groceries, called neighbourhood markets, that were
meant to fill in the spaces between the larger discount stores and
supercentres, and a warehouse-style format, which Wal-Mart calls Sam's
Club. But, says Mr Schoewe, Wal-Mart then changed tack. It began to
realise that America's suburbs can absorb many more supercentres than
the company had previously supposed. 



Glorious suburbia
If that seems fanciful, then spend the 45 minutes it takes to drive
across Arizona's Valley of the Sun from Scottsdale, a well-heeled
suburb of Phoenix, to the city of Surprise to the west. Between the
strip malls, low-rise apartments and Whataburger franchises that dot
the route, Wal-Mart's name pops up again and again. On a single
20-mile stretch of road sit six giant Wal-Marts, all of them doing a
reasonable business on a recent rainy weekday. Shoppers have 14 more
Wal-Marts to pick from a few miles further south and east. The area,
says Mr Schoewe, with obvious pride ,

The valley's sprawll-Mart's new supercentres, which can range up to
220,000 square feet in size, are now being designed to be just a
fraction smaller than the 100,000 square-foot limits on retail units
that have been imposed in some parts of America. For instance,
Wal-Mart recently opened a 99,000 square-foot outlet in Florida.

In states with strong trade unions, such as New Jersey, Illinois and
California, Wal-Mart has faced what has been called a n: obstruction
and boycotts, sometimes only on an individual basis, by people who
object to its strong anti-union stance. Naturally, Wal-Mart has grown
fastest where it has been easiest to build its big boxes. Per head of
population, there are between five and ten times as many stores in
Arkansas, Oklahoma, Mississippi and Missouri as there are in New
Jersey, California and New York.

Wal-Mart is buying up land at an astonishing rate. The monthly
real-estate meeting in Bentonville approves more than $1 billion-worth
of land purchases every time it gathers, says Mr Schoewe. Yet as
Wal-Mart makes more of those purchases in the less-served, but more
difficult states, growth will inevitably slow. It can take the company
two or even three times as long to open an outlet in California than
in Arizona, for instance. All the same, Michael Silverstein of the
Boston Consulting Group (BCG), thinks Wal-Mart's core business has
three years of decent growth left in it. Darrell Rigby of Bain,
another consultancy, thinks there i s

That growth alone would result in a firm with annual sales of
somewhere between $350 billion and $450 billion. On top of this,
investors must weigh the likely success of Wal-Mart's expansion
overseas where, in the longer term, the firm will have to find the
bulk of its growth. Traditionally, retailers are not very good at
going abroad. Wal-Mart is no exception. It has done well in America's
border countries. It has been successful in Canada, for instance, and
in Mexico, where Wal-Mart is the biggest private employer.

But in Germany, Wal-Mart ended up with egg on its face. Even Mr Scott
has admitted that the company's arrival wa s, although the situation
is improving. Wal-Mart entered Germany, the third-biggest retail
market after America and Japan, in 1997-98 by buying two local retail
chains, Wertkauf and Interspar, for $1.6 billion. Whereas Wertkauf was
well-known and profitable, Interspar was weak and operated mostly
run-down stores. Wal-Mart has lost money in Germany ever
since. Problems have included price controls, which prevent below-cost
selling, rigid labour laws and tough zoning regulations, which make it
extremely difficult to build big stores.

Wal-Mart also faced well-established rivals in Germany, like Metro,
and hard discounters such as Aldi and Lidl, already comfortable with
razor-thin profit margins. Many retailers in Germany are owned by
wealthy families whose business priorities are not always the
maximisation of shareholder value.

But there was more to it than that. Wal-Mart's entry wa s, according
to the authors of a study at the University of Bremen. At first,
Wal-Mart's expatriate managers suffered from a massive clash of
cultures, which was not helped by their refusal to learn to speak
German. The company has come to be seen as an unattractive one to work
for, adds the study. In part this is because of relatively low pay and
an ultra-frugal policy on managers' business expenses.

This contrasts with Wal-Mart's much smoother expansion into Britain,
where it bought Asda for $10.7 billion in 1999. Asda already had a
strong business competing on price, and it has since overtaken
struggling J. Sainsbury to become the second-biggest supermarket chain
after Tesco. But that may say more about Sainsbury's difficulties in
overcoming its problems than Asda's successes. Unlike Tesco, under its
boss Sir Terry Leahy, Sainsbury was slow in responding to Wal-Mart's
expected arrival in the British market. In particular, it was late in
expanding into non-food goods, the source of much of Tesco's
growth. Tesco, which now has half its retail space overseas, also
competes with Wal-Mart in other countries.



A force for good?
In the popular imagination, Wal-Mart ruthlessly exterminates the
competition, especially local mom-and-pop retailers. Yet as Bain's Mr
Rigby argues, Wal-Mart is more than just a destructive force . says Mr
Rigby .

A number of retailers in America have gone up against Wal-Mart and
survived Wal-Mart's Sam's Club chain. Costco carries international
brands and is particularly noted for its wines and surprises: it
recently had $52,000 diamond rings for sale. Costco also has a
reputation for paying its staff well above the average union rates.

Then there is HEB, a 100-year-old retailer operating supermarkets in
Texas and Mexico. It looked to be doomed when Wal-Mart rode into
town. But it was re-invigorated into an award-winning grocer that
impresses many in the industry . says Mr Rigby . One of HEB's features
is a concept calle d which provides a wide variety of fresh and
prepared foods within its stores, including on-site chefs who show how
to prepare the evening meal.

All three of these retailers offer something similar: low prices, with
something extra on top, be it a nicer shopping experience or luxury
goods. Conceivably, this might hint at a more threatening market
change: that shoppers might begin to tire of the attractions of
rock-bottom prices alone. BCG's Mr Silverstein has written a book*
describing how American shoppers are becoming increasingly
sophisticated in the way they discriminate betwee n to those goods
they think of as luxury items, an d to the rest . says Mr
Silverstein .

AP 
 
 
Growing up with Wal-Mart
 


Alternatively, the everyday-low-price pull may lessen as prices stop
falling so quickly. Mr Schoewe says that, because Wal-Mart has already
gained most of the advantages of importing goods from China, deflation
in the Wal-Mart economy should slow down in coming years. He maintains
that this will be a source of future financial growth for the
company. But perhaps slowing deflation will work in the opposite
direction, as consumers no longer stampede with such relish through
Wal-Mart's stores in search of the DVD player that has dropped from
$49 to $28.

Perhaps Wal-Mart might even begin to suffer upward pressure on prices
as it struggles to hold down costs. A.T. Kearney, a consultancy,
recently examined the perception that Wal-Mart uses its huge size to
clobber its suppliers into providing lower prices, but concluded that
this i s. Indeed, in many cases manufacturers actually make more money
selling through Wal-Mart than through other retailers. Wal-Mart is not
easy to work for, but some suppliers say the experience has made them
leaner and fitter. One of the latest companies to conclude that it
would be better off supplying Wal-Mart is Levi Strauss. It has been
struggling to boost sales through traditional department stores, but
has now produced a range of jeans, called Levi Strauss Signature, for
sale through Wal-Mart and other discount stores. Some are selling in
Arizona for $9 a pair. So far, the decision seems to be paying
off. This week Levi reported a better-than-expected 9.7% increase in
first-quarter sales.

According to A.T. Kearney, Wal-Mart's three-biggest sources of cost
advantage are low corporate overheads, the efficiencies of its
supply-chain and, above all, its low labour costs. A newly hire d, as
Wal-Mart calls its employees, could earn as little as $8 an hour, some
20-30% less than unionised workers at rival supermarkets. Union
members might also have benefits, such as health-care insurance.

There are several reasons to suppose that this labour-cost advantage
might begin to erode. One is falling costs elsewhere as Wal-Mart
squeezes its competition. In February, for instance, unionised
grocery-store workers in southern California agreed to wage and
benefit reductions following a five-month-long strike. This strike
began after local supermarkets proposed to cut wages and benefits in
preparation for Wal-Mart's entry into the market.

A second reason might be slowing staff turnover at Wal-Mart itself, as
the firm struggles to renew its 1.4m-strong workforce. In recent
years, staff turnover at Wal-Mart has fallen from over 60% to 44%,
close to industry averages. Yet even with a turnover rate of 44%, the
firm has to hire an astonishing 600,000 people every year simply to
stay at its current size. As the company grows and employs yet more
people, that task will become even more difficult, suggesting that
Wal-Mart will want to push turnover lower still. That might put
pressure on costs, as workers gain tenure, pay rises and better
benefits.

Another force working to slow Wal-Mart down is the company's mounting
legal and labour-compliance problems. At any moment, Wal-Mart faces
about 8,000 lawsuits. The vast majority of these are personal-injury
claims from employees. More material, given the sheer numbers of
people that Wal-Mart employs, are employee suits seeking class-action
status. Among other suits, Wal-Mart's most recent annual report lists
33 putative class-action suits alleging violations of the Fair Labour
Standards Act, including forcing employees to wor k and failing to
provide work breaks; eight further putative suits alleging that the
firm failed to pay overtime; and a suit that could prove costly
alleging discrimination against its female employees. The potential
size of this class alone is 1.5m plaintiffs.



Cleaning up its act
An investigation is also continuing into allegations over whether
Wal-Mart knew that a subcontractor was using illegal workers. Last
year, federal agents raided a number of stores and took documents from
the company's headquarters. Wal-Mart has denied doing anything wrong.

In response to a comment by Mr Scott tha t Forrester, a research
company, predicted tha t The company is recruiting more legal help: in
January, it hired Tom Gean, a former United States attorney, to work
with it s, which have been set up to assist store managers keep within
laws and regulations.

That points to a broader worry for the company: that its cherished
entrepreneurial culture might become choked by expanding
human-resources, public relations and legal departments. Wal-Mart has
fought hard to preserve its entrepreneurial culture, which pushes
responsibility out to the company's powerful store managers and
endeavours to check central, bureaucratic growth. But being big makes
companies a magnet for social issues. And freedom among the firm's
store managers to set policies which they think will make their
outlets as profitable as possible also provides room for abuse.

With so many eyes watching it, Wal-Mart may have decided that it has
to sacrifice a bit of its entrepreneurialism to reduce its legal
risks. It recently set up  a, introduced new personnel procedures,
hired extra lobbyists in Washington, DC, created a n, and launched new
public-relations and advertising initiatives, dubbe d an d, featuring
lots of beaming associates. These are not the actions of a company
intending to get smaller. Wal-Mart, already huge, is preparing to get
a whole lot bigger.


