Popular physics 

All strung out

Apr 15th 2004 
From The Economist print edition



The Fabric of the Cosmos: Space, Time, and the Texture of Reality
By Brian Greene


THIS overly ambitious attempt to explain almost everything in the
universe feels as if it started life on a publisher's wish-list rather
than in the mind of the author. Brian Greene is a talented writer
whose first book ,, had a more modest goal: it sought to explai n,
currently the most popular explanation of fundamental physics, to the
layman. That was not a simple task, but Mr Greene, a string theorist
himself and a professor of physics and mathematics at Columbia
University in New York, did it well . became that rarityspace and
time, is that sequel. It is not the first, nor will it be the last, to
disappoint.

At his best, Mr Greene is a marvellously talented exponent of
physicsproach which is highly confusing to the novice.

And the book is clearly pitched at the novice. Equations are banished
to the copious footnotes, and the text is over-peppered with allusions
to popular culture, for the most part television shows such a s an
d. The allusions serve to distract rather than to amuse, as do Mr
Greene's attempts at outright jokes. 

The footnotes, a substantial proportion of which are issued with the
prefatory , are another weakness. A serious attempt to read them
abruptly breaks the flow of the text, but they themselves are not, for
the most part, seriously designed to illuminate. Rather, they consist
of cursory explanations that seem designed more as a nod to colleagues
who already know the subject than as a pedagogical guide to the
notiona l. They are too short to offer any explanation to someone who
does not already know the subject matter, even as they are too
involved to be useful to anyone wary of mathematics.

The book also illustrates another danger in popular physics written by
current practitioners. Although it is the more popular (and
better-developed), string theory is but one of two contemporary
approaches to the fundamental question about the nature of space and
time. The other, loop quantum gravity, is given short, if civil,
shrift by Mr Greene. In his previous book, which was about string
theory, this was only fair. But in the current book, which claims to
tackle a bigger subject, it is a serious omission. 

