Now what?

Apr 7th 2004 | WASHINGTON, DC 
From The Economist print edition


EPA 



The president stands firm, but his support looks shakier

FIRST came the televised murders and mutilations of four American
contractors in Fallujah. Next, the deaths of eight American soldiers
in an uprising in Sadr City. On April 6th, the killing of up to 12
marines in Ramadi. The bad news comes too fast for polling to keep
pace with it. Up to the Ramadi deaths, there had been no sign of a
Mogadishu moment confidence, as in 1993 in Somalia, in a whole
military operation. But the events have nonetheless shaken Americans'
support for the administration's handling of Iraq and brought to the
surface unease among politicians about long-term plans for an orderly
transition there.

Popular opinion first. The earliest poll (by the Pew Research Centre)
taken after the shocking footage from Fallujah showed no erosion in
public support for the war. At the start of April, 57% of Americans
thought George Bush had made the right decision in going to war with
Iraq, unchanged from February. Half of Americans, somewhat down from
January, favoured keeping troops in the country until there is a
stable government. The picture is not very different from Somalia,
where a majority in 1993 said they favoured sending more troops to the
country even after the killing of 18 servicemen.

But there are increasing signs of public nervousness about the conduct
of policy, even while opinion remains steadfast about the war's
justification. Approval of Mr Bush's handling of Iraq has plummeted to
40%, from 59% in January. His overall job-approval rating, at 43%, is
the lowest of his presidency. And just one-third of Americans think he
has a clear plan for what to do in Iraq: a very low number, though
hardly a surprising one.

Almost all America' s, from Vietnam to Somalia, have shown that the
public is less casualty-averse than is usually believed, suggesting
they will not want to cut and run just because of the deaths in
Fallujah and Ramadi. But they are very responsive to the opinions of
political leaders. Public opinion turned against Somalia and Vietnam
only after the country's leaders did. With confidence in Mr Bush's
plans in Iraq already miserably low, support for the war could
therefore be highly vulnerable to any shakiness of resolve among
America's politicians. 

At the moment, the talk is all of brave resolution . said the White
House press spokesman on April 7th. And Mr Bush repeated that his
administration would stick to its timetable to hand over sovereignty
to the Iraqis on June 30th. Little sign of wobbling there.

But over the next few weeks the administration faces a series of hard
decisions in Iraq. It must make them against the background of a
highly unstable environment, and it has few palatable choices. These
circumstances will test the current sense of resolve to the limit.

The two main questions are whether to send more troops to Iraq and
whether to postpone the planned handover of sovereignty. In private,
senior Defence Department officials have given up claiming that the
security situation is about to improve. This week, the Pentagon
suspended the rotation home of 24,000 soldiers from Iraq and General
John Abizaid, the chief of America's central command, asked for
contingency plans to increase the number of soldiers in his
region. These are the clearest signs yet that the Pentagon is
concerned about deteriorating security. They reverse the previous
insistence of Donald Rumsfeld, the secretary of defence, that more
troops would not be needed.

Last weekend, Richard Lugar, the chairman of the Senate Foreign
Relations Committee, became the first senior Republican to suggest in
public that the handover date of June 30th might be postponed. He
argued that Iraqi security forces would not nearly be ready then and
that the administration's plans for America's role in the
post-handover period were vague.

Both suggestionsaucuses in favour of a direct election, and allowing
low-level Ba'ath Party members back into the security forces. It can
hardly change again without looking entirely fickle. 

America may have done most of what it can do in Iraq. This means it
has few options if the occupation fails to start improving the quality
of life there. And, at the moment, the opposite is happening.


