Palestine 

Who's in charge?

Mar 11th 2004 | EAST JERUSALEM 
From The Economist print edition


Reuters 
 
 

 

Chaos within Yasser Arafat's own organisation makes it even harder for
Israelis and Palestinians to come to terms

Get article background

THE prospect of a meeting, perhaps next week, between Ahmed Qurei, the
Palestinian prime minister, and his Israeli counterpart, Ariel Sharon,
is concentrating minds, both within and outside the snakepit of
regional and local politics. It would be the pair's first handshake
since Mr Qurei took up the poisoned chalice of his job in October. The
Egyptians, in particular, whose intelligence chief has been secretly
chatting to Mr Sharon, want to know how the Gaza Strip, which abuts
Egypt's Sinai peninsula, will be administered if, as Mr Sharon
promised a month ago, Israel removes the Jewish settlements from the
area. And the foreign minister of Jordan, the other Arab country most
directly concerned, put his finger on one of the most vexing problems
that would arise in the event of an Israeli withdrawal .

Many people, Palestinian and Israeli, have doubts. Hence the urgency
with which Fatah, the beefiest group under the umbrella of the
Palestine Liberation Organisation, is trying to rejuvenate
itself. Yet, by calling a party conference to be held within a year,
Fatah may worsen its own rifts. And the standing of its leader, Yasser
Arafat, who also presides over the Palestinian Authority (PA), may
fall still further.

A reverse Arabic acronym fo r, Fatah, under Mr Arafat's leadership,
has always been at the heart of the Palestinians' struggle for
self-determination. But it long ago lost its shine. The movement's
effectiveness has been crushed by the intifada and Israel's aggressive
response; it has not held an election for 15 years; and it is deeply
and painfully at odds with itself. 

The rift goes back as far as the 1993 Oslo accords. Fatah has
supported the peaceful two-state principle since the late 1980s, but
half the 11-member Central Council opposed the terms of the agreement
with Israel negotiated secretly in the Norwegian capital. However,
Fatah and the PA, which was set up after the Oslo accords to run the
West Bank and Gaza, soon became closely identified. Key posts in the
authority have always gone to Fatah members loyal to Mr Arafat, some
of them notorious for their corruption. Directly elected president of
the PA in 1996, Mr Arafat sees any attempt to change this system of
patronage as a threat to his leadership. So, as the PA limps on,
trying to run the territories under the impossible conditions of
Israel's closures and semi-occupation, so limps the top civilian
echelon of Fatah. 

At the same time, many Fatah leaders followed the Palestinia n in
believing that if they were ever to win real independence, they had to
pursue a dual policy of negotiations and armed attacks. After the
start of the latest intifada in 2000, a special Fatah unit was created
for operations against Israel, known as the al-Aqsa Martyrs Brigades. 

The fact that the Martyrs Brigades are not under the PA's control
gives Mr Arafat freedom to condemn their operations. But his
connection with Fatah's military wing is a point of contention. To
begin with, the Fatah military groups eschewed suicide-bombing and
aimed most of their operations at targetsto their seats on most
campuses.



Fatahcidal
In the aftermath of the student elections, Fatah's internal
differences over strategy, leadership and the allocation of severely
limited resources came fiercely to the surface. In some places,
personal disputes and power struggles became armed battles. Recently
the mayor of Nablus, the West Bank's biggest town, resigned in protest
at the PA's failure to sort out rows within the local Fatah branch
that had caused havoc in what he called hi s. Mr Arafat once mediated
in such disputes. Now, confined by Israel to his decrepit quarters in
Ramallah, he is no longer able to do so. The leadership's unpopularity
has been accentuated by the apparent attempts of security men thought
to be close to Mr Arafat to intimidate Palestinian journalists, in the
West Bank and Gaza, who have written candidly about the chaos and
corruption in the PA, and in Fatah. 

The quarrel is often said to be between Fatah' s an d guards: insiders
from the West Bank and old PLO men who came from exile. But the
differences criss-cross this divide. On both sides, many Palestinians
think that the al-Aqsa Brigades, or at least those cells still loyal
to Fatah, should be reined in. Others say that the strategy itself
must change.

These, the keenest reformers, look to the party conference heralded
recently by Mr Arafat, and hope that an array of younger people will
oust the old guard at the top. One snag is that under present
conditions, with the Israeli army keeping tight screws on the West
Bank and Gaza, it will be impossible for a fully representative
conference to take place, let alone one that includes participants
from Fatah's far-flung diaspora. The splits, and the festering of Mr
Arafat's leadership, are intensified as Hamas continues its hideous
suicide bombings, challenging Fatah to match it. 

Meanwhile, if the Israelis do leave Gaza, it is unclear whether Mr
Arafat's loyalists or other, much more extreme peoplewould hardly be
the best way to get the parties back on the almost-out-of-sight
American- and European-backe d to peace.


