North Korea 

Through a glass, darkly

Mar 11th 2004 | PYONGYANG AND PUKCHANG 
From The Economist print edition


 
 
 

 

So far as a visitor can tell in this secretive land, North Korea's
economic reforms are starting to bite. But real progress will require
better relations with the outside 

Get article background

COMMUNIST North Korea has started to experiment with economic reform,
and opened its door a crack to the outside world. Though its culture
of secrecy and suspicion stubbornly persists, it was deemed acceptable
for your correspondent to visit Pyongyang's Tongil market last
week. Here, stalls are bursting with plump vegetables and groaning
with stacks of fresh meat. You can even buy imported pineapples and
bananas from enthusiastic private traders.

But how about a photograph? Most foreigners think of North Korea as a
famished nation, and the authorities are evidently keen these days to
tell the world about the great strides their economy has made since
reforms were introduced in July 2002. Logic might seem to suggest that
a snap showing the palpable result of the reforms would be acceptable
too. But it is not. The officials were friendly but firm: no pictures
of fat carrots.

The July 2002 reforms were ground-breaking for North Korea: the first
real step away from central planning since the dawn of communism there
in 1945. The government announced that subsidies to state-owned
enterprises were to be withdrawn, workers would be paid according to
how much they produced, farmers' markets, hitherto tolerated, would
become legal and state enterprises would be allowed to sell
manufactured products in markets. Most of these enterprises, unless
they produce d, were to get real autonomy from state control.

Almost two years on, how to assess the success or failure of these
reforms? That climate of secrecy makes it deeply frustrating. Even the
simplest of statistics is unavailable. Li Gi Song, a senior economist
at Pyongyang's Academy of Sciences, says he does not know the rate of
inflation. Or maybe he is not telling. After all, he says , So what
follows can be little more than a series of impressions.

The indications are that the reforms are having a big impact. For a
start, North Korea has recently acquired its first advertisement
(pictured above)o be more basic, take the price of rice, North Korea's
staple. Before the reforms, the state bought rice from state farms and
co-operatives at 82 chon per kilo (100 chon make one won, worth less
than a cent at the official exchange rate). It then resold it to the
public through the country's rationing system at eight chon. Now,
explains Mr Li, the state buys at 42 won and resells at 46 won.

North Korea's rationing system is called the Public Distribution
System (PDS). Every month people are entitled to buy a certain amount
of rice or other available staples at the protected price. Thus most
North Koreans get 300g (9oz) of rice a day, at 46 won a
kilo. According to the UN's World Food Programme (WFP), that is not
nearly enough. Anything extra has to be bought in the market. 

In theory, even in the market the price of staples is limited. Last
week, the maximum permitted rice price was marked on a board at the
entrance to Tongil as 240 won per kilo. In fact, it was selling for
250. WFP officials say that in January it was selling for 145 won,
which points to significant inflation, for rice at least. This is not
necessarily a bad thing, since it means that the price is coming into
line with the market.

The won's international value is also adjusting. Since December 2002,
the euro has been North Korea's official currency for all foreign
transactions. In North Korean banks, one euro buys 171 won. In fact,
this rate is purely nominal. A semi-official rate now exists and the
price of imports in shops is calculated using this. 

Last October, according to foreign diplomats, a euro bought 1,030 won
at the semi-official rate. Last week it was 1,400. A black market also
exists, in which the euro is reported to be fetching 1,600 wonin the
range of 150-200 won per month. Rent and utilities, though, were
virtually free, as were (and are) education and health care. Food, via
the PDS, was virtually given away. Now, pay is supposed to be linked
to output, though becoming more productive is not easy for desk-bound
civil servants or workers in factories that have no power, raw
materials or markets.

Rents and utilities have gone up, though not by crippling amounts. A
two-bedroom flat in Pyongyang including electricity, water and heat
costs just 150 won a monthges still have a long way to adjust.

The prices of food and other necessities, to say nothing of luxuries,
has gone up much more than rent has. According to the WFP, some 70% of
the households it has interviewed are dependent on their 300 gram PDS
ration, and the WFP itself is targeting 6.5m vulnerable people out of
a total population of some 23m. Not all suffer equally: civil servants
in Pyongyang get double food rations from the PDS.

There are some encouraging stories. In Pukchang, a small industrial
town 70km (40 miles) north-east of Pyongyang, Concern, an Irish aid
group, has been replacing ancient, leaking and broken-down water pipes
and pumps, and modernising the purification system. This has pushed
the amount of clean water available per person per day from 80 to 300
litres. Kim Chae Sun is a manager at the filtration plant, which is
now more efficient. Before July 2002 she earned 80 won a
month. Afterwards she earned 3,000 won. Now she earns 3,500.

As Mrs Kim speaks, three giant chimneys belch smoke from the power
station that dominates the town. All workers have been told they can
earn more if they work harder, but certain groups have been told they
will get even more money than everyone else. In energy-starved North
Korea these include miners and power workers. Mrs Kim says her
husband, who works in the power plant, earns an average of 12,000 won
a month. Her rent has gone up from eight to 102 won a month, and in a
year, she thinks, she will be able to buy a television or a fridge.

A lot of people, in fact, are buying televisions. The women who sell
the sets from crowded Tongil market-stalls get them from trading
companies which they pay after making a sale. The company price for an
average set is 72,000 won, the profit just 1,000 won. After they have
paid for their pitch, the traders can expect an income of
10,000-12,000 won a month. 



Mystery sales
Which makes for a puzzle. Who can afford a good month's salary for a
locally made jacket in Tongil, costing 4,500 won? How come so many
people are buying televisions, which cost more than two years of a
civil-servant's pay? How come the number of cars on the streets of the
capital has shot up in the past year? Pyongyang still has vastly less
traffic than any other capital city on earth, but there are far more
cars around than a year ago. Restaurants, of which there are many,
serve good foodorean-owned private companies.

 
 
 
Oh for a tractor
 


Farmers are among the other winners: they can sell any surpluses on
the open market. But two out of three North Koreans live in towns and
cities, and only 18% of the country is suitable for agriculture. The
losers include civil servants, especially those outside Pyongyang who
do not get double food rations and have no way to increase their
productivity. 

Factory workers have it the hardest. A large proportion of industry is
obsolete. Though Pyongyang has electricity most of the day, much of
the rest of the country does not. Despite wild talk of a high-tech
revolution, the country is not connected to the internet, though some
high-ups do have access to e-mail service. In the east of the country
lies a vast rustbelt of collapsing manufacturing plants.

Huge but unknown numbers of workers have been moved into farming, even
though every scrap of available land is already being cultivated. The
extra workers are needed because there is virtually no power for
threshing and harvesting and no diesel for farm vehicles. This
requires more work to be done by hand. Ox-carts are a common sight.



The innocent suffer
Markets are everywhere. But this does not mean that there is enough
food everywhere. In Pyongyang, where there are better-off people to
pay for it, there is an ever-increasing supply. Outside the capital,
shortages are widespread. 

No one knows how many died during the famine years of 1995-99;
estimates range from 200,000 to 3m. In Pukchang, officials say that 5%
of children are still weak and malnourished. In Hoichang, east of
Pyongyang, schools and institutions tell the WFP that about 10% of
children are malnourished. Masood Hyder, the senior UN official in
North Korea, says that vulnerable households now spend up to 80% of
their income on food. 

And yet some things are improving. Two surveys carried out in 1998 and
2002 by the North Korean government together with the WFP and Unicef
showed a dramatic improvement in children's health between those
years. The proportion of children who fail to reach their proper
height because of malnutrition fell from 62% to 39%, and the figures
are thought to be still better now. However, Unicef says that though
children may no longer die of hunger, they are still dying from
diarrhoea and respiratory diseases get it back on its feet it would
need a reconstruction effort on the scale of Afghanistan and Iraq. 

Such bleak talk is echoed by Eigil Sorensen of the World Health
Organisation. He says that health services are extremely limited
outside the capital. Medicines and equipment are in short supply,
large numbers of hospitals no longer have running water or heating and
the country has no capacity to handle a major health crisis. 

None of this is likely to change very fast. With no end yet to the
nuclear stand-off between North Korea and the United States, American
and Japanese sanctions will remain in place. And nukes are only part
of it. Last week the American State Department said it was likely that
North Korea produced and sold heroin and other narcotics abroad as a
matter of state policy. North Koreans who have fled claim that up to
200,000 compatriots are in labour camps. North Korea denies it all. 

Reform, such as it is, has plainly made life easier for many. But
rescuing the North would take large amounts of foreign money, as well
as measures more far-reaching than have yet been attempted. At
present, there is no way for the government to get what it needs from
international financial institutions like the World Bank. Such aid as
comes will be strictly humanitarian, and investment in so opaque a
country will never be more than tentative. Domestic reform on its own
cannot fix an economy wrecked by decades of mismanagement and the
collapse of communism almost everywhere else.



