Portugal 

Stability pays

Mar 25th 2004 | LISBON 
From The Economist print edition


The prime minister wins surprising support for fiscal austerity

WHILE Portugal's finance minister, Manuela Ferreira Leite, was out
shopping in Lisbon recently, an old lady came up to congratulate her
warmly on he r. Josi Manuel Durco Barroso, the centre-right prime
minister, relishes this story as evidence of how his fiscal rigour is
changing attitudes in a country long used to government overspending
. he says .
 
To comply with the euro area's stability-pact limit on budget deficits
of 3% of GDP, Mr Durco Barroso's government imposed a string of tough
austerity measures, and urged stoicism when the country then suffered
the sharpest recession in Europe (see chart). The economy shrank by
1.3% last year. That does not sound like a vote-winner. But at the
2006 election, predicts Mr Durco Barroso, his Social Democratic Party
will wi n. The Portuguese may not relish austerity, but polls bear out
the prime minister's assertion tha t

Winning votes by squeezing public spending or raising taxes is not a
strategy that appeals to other European leaders. The German and French
governments have used an economic downturn as an excuse to flout the
stability-pact rules. And yet both are deeply unpopular with their
voters. Mr Durco Barroso claims not to be a popularity-seeker . he
says .

In his two years in government, Mr Durco Barroso has declared tw o in
his struggle for sound public finances. In 2002 he slashed the budget
deficit inherited from the previous government from 4.4% to 2.7% of
GDP, in only eight months . he boasts. And last year he kept the
deficit down to only 2.8%. Yet he also believes he has brought in more
reforms than other European countries with healthier economies . he
insists. But the state's example of fiscal rigour is, he believes,
setting the tone for company and family finances too. This will enable
the economy to make the most of a recovery that should be gathering
force by 2005-06